L—~>
FPRI
WP The Race for Drones
The Race for Drones
November 24, 2014
By Michael J. Boyle
November 24, 2014
By Michael J. Boyle
Michael J. Boyle is an Associate Professor of Political Science at La Salle University and a
Senior Fellow at the Foreign Policy Research Institute. He is the author of Violence after War:
Explaining Instability in Post-Conjlict States (Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press, 2014).
Michael J. Boyle is an Associate Professor of Political Science at La Salle University and a
Senior Fellow at the Foreign Policy Research Institute. He is the author of Violence after War:
Explaining Instability in Post-Conflict States (Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press, 2014).
Abstract: In just the last ten years, a growing number of states have sought to join the race to
develop and sell ever-more sophisticated drones on the global market.
growing number of states have sought to join
the
develop and sell ever-more sophisticated drones on the global market.
While today the market
While today the market
remains stratified between makers and takers of drones, the gradual emergence of a drones arms
race will have some important and potentially dangerous consequences for the international system.
The emergence of a race for drones will reshape long-simmering conflicts and rivalries around the
world in three ways.
of a
international
drones arms
system.
race will have some important and potentially
dangerous
consequences for the
The emergence of a race for drones will reshape long-simmering conflicts and rivalries around the
world in three ways. First, the proliferation of drones will reset the rules and norms governing
surveillance and reconnaissance. Second, drones will become increasingly useful to governments in
testing the strategic commitments and the nerves of their rivals. Third, the worldwide proliferation
of drones will multiply the risks of conflict spirals stemming from accidents or hijacked drones.
Given these risks, Washington’ should take a leading role in slowing the global race for drones and
in developing strict legal andnormative mechanisms to govern drone usage andsales in thefuture.
First, the proliferation of drones will reset the rules and norms governing
surveillance and reconnaissance.
Second, drones will become increasingly useful to governments in
testing the strategic commitments and the nerves of their rivals. Third, the worldwide proliferation
of drones will multiply the risks of conflict spirals stemming from accidents or hijacked drones.
Given these risks, Washington’ should take a leading role in slowing the global race for drones and
in developing strict legal and normative mechanisms to govern drone usage and sales in the future.
O
ver the last two decades, the United States has been the world’s pre-
eminent user and supplier of Unmanned Aerial Vehicles (UAVs). In 2013,
the United States was estimated to have approximately 7,500 drones in
ver the last two decades, the United States has been the world’s pre-
eminent user and supplier of Unmanned Aerial Vehicles (UAVs). In 2013,
the United States was estimated to have approximately 7,500 drones in
operation, ranging from relatively small surveillance drones to the more famous
Predator and Reaper models used for targeted killings in Pakistan, Yemen and
elsewhere.1 By contrast, China’s fleet, ranked as the second largest in the world, is
smaller than the United States by at least several thousand drones. One estimate in
2011 suggested that China’s Air Force possessed only 280 drones, although other
operation, ranging from relatively small surveillance drones to the more famous
Predator and Reaper models used for targeted killings in Pakistan, Yemen and
elsewhere.! By contrast, China’s fleet, ranked as the second largest in the world, is
smaller than the United States by at least several thousand drones. One estimate in
2011 suggested that China’s Air Force possessed only 280 drones, although other
remains stratified between makers and takers of drones, the gradual
Abstract: In just the last ten years,
1 Micah Zenko, “10 Things You Didn’t Know About Drones,” Foreign Policy, March/April
2012.
draseats
GULLY,» +v auings You Didn’t Know About Drones,” Foreign Policy, March/April
© 2015 Published for the Foreign Policy Research Institute by Elsevier Ltd.
oreign Policy Research Institute by Elsevier Ltd.
Winter 2015 | 76
Winter 2015 |
doi: 10.1016/j.orbis.2014.11.007 doi: 10.1016/j.orbis.2014.11.007

The Race for Drones
branches of the Chinese government have thousands more.2 Moreover, the United
States has enjoyed vast technological advantages in range and strike capacity of its
drones, making its fleet a cut above those held by their global competitors.3 Other
states, such as Britain, Israel, Russia, and the United Arab Emirates have their own
growing drones programs, and have invested in research and development, but
remain far behind the United States in the number and sophistication of their
drones. The concentration of technological know-how in U.S. companies, and the
vast infrastructure in research and development for drones present in the United
States, has led many observers to conclude that America will retain an
unchallengeable pre-eminence in drones for the foreseeable future.4 The global
diffusion of drones, according to the conventional wisdom, is not a problem
because of the lead in drone technology that the United States holds over potential
adversaries.
Such complacency about the consequences of a global race for drones is
not warranted. Today, America’s comparative advantage in drones is being eroded
as drone technology is spreading across the international system. While their
current technology lags, and in some cases merely imitates, U.S. drone models,
global competitors such as China and Russia are now spending billions to catch up
to the United States in research and development for drone technology. The U.S.
lead will remain for the next decade or more, but the substantial Chinese, Russian
and European investments in drone research and production will gradually match
the technological advantage currently held by U.S. companies. Moreover, the
United States is not the dominant player in the current export market for drones.
Israel has become the world’s supplier of first resort, selling drone technology to a
large number of other states for domestic and military uses. Due to U.S. and Israeli
exports, and the efforts of other states to develop drone export markets, drones
have now spread to most established militaries in the developed world. Between
2004 and 2011, the number of states with active UAV programs doubled, from 40
to over 80.5 More than one third of the states in the world have developed their
own drones programs, ranging from relatively small boutique programs to growing
multi-purpose drone programs used for combat, surveillance and civilian uses.
According to a RAND study, 23 countries are developing their own technology for
different types of armed drones.6
2 “Chinese Hacking Aims to Gain U.S. Drone Technology,” United Press International,
Sept. 21, 2013.
3 “China hacking aims to gain U.S. drone technology,” United Press International, Sept. 21,
2013.
4 Joseph Singh, “Betting Against a Drones Arms Race,” Time Magazine, Aug. 13, 2012. See
also Shashank Joshi and Aaron Stein, “Emerging Drone Nations,” Survival 55:5 (2013), pp.
53-78.
5 “Agencies Could Improve Sharing and End-Use Monitoring on Unmanned Aerial Vehicle
Exports,” General Accounting Office, GAO 12-536, July 2012, p. 9.
6 Lynn E. Davis, Michael J. McNerney, James Chow, Thomas Hamilton, Sarah Harting, and
Daniel Byman, “Armed and Dangerous: UAVs and U.S. Security” (Washington DC: RAND,
2014), p. 9.
Winter 2015 | 77

BOYLE
Even in an era of austerity and steep cuts in defense spending, the demand
for drones is increasing, leading a growing number of states to consider joining the
export market.
The American and Israeli companies that traditionally have
dominated the drones market are now facing increasingly stiff competition from
Chinese companies who are developing dozens of drone models for the export
market. The competition will only become more intense as new arms
manufacturers from Europe, Russia, and the Middle East begin to catch up.
Moreover, many of these states, such as Russia and China, face fewer export
restrictions and will be able to sell sophisticated drones to governments not
authorized by the U.S. Congress to receive comparable American models.
The
result is that drones of increasing quality will soon be in the hands of states such as
Iran, Syria, and North Korea.7 Similarly, non-state actors will get into the race for
drones, as the United States recently discovered when Jabhat al-Nusra and ISIS
deployed drones to coordinate attacks against targets in Syria. 8
The long-term strategic consequences of this new arms race in drones
around the world will not be known for decades. At this point, drones are not an
immediate strategic game changer in the way that nuclear weapons once were. A
better analogy is the diffusion of military aircraft: after the pioneering use of heavier-
than-air aircraft by the U.S. in 1910, all of the major powers at the time—Britain,
France, Austria, Germany and Italy—rapidly followed suit with their own military
aviation programs, while many other states became purchasers of aviation from
dominant American, British and other European suppliers. The diffusion of
military aircraft (of varying quality) continued throughout the 1930-1940s to the
point where almost every major military in the world boasted at least a token
military aviation capability. Over time, it became a mark of prestige for a state to
have an air force even if it conveyed little more than symbolic value. By the late
1940s, it was clear that the diffusion of military aviation was creating dramatic
strategic consequences, either by resetting the terms of competition for existing
rivalries or by introducing a degree of uncertainty into regional balances of power.
The world is now approaching a similar point with drones as the race for
this technology is resetting the terms of global competition and quietly altering the
rules of the game for many long-simmering conflicts and rivalries. This is
happening in part because few, if any, states will use drones in the way that the
United States currently does, as a way to ruthlessly target militant networks in
ungoverned territories. Rather, the proliferation of drones will also be accompanied
by rapid adaption of drones to new, and perhaps unforeseen, civilian and military
uses, which will have three consequences for the international system. First, the
proliferation of drones will reset the rules and norms governing surveillance and
reconnaissance and invite new counter-measures that may paradoxically increase
7 The Syrian government has used drones supplied by Iran for strikes against rebel forces.
Joby Warrick, “Russian, Iranian technology is boosting Assad’s assaults on Syrian rebels,”
The Washington Post, June 1, 2013.
8 Cody Poplin, “Look Who Else Has Drones: ISIS and al Nusra,” Lawfare, Oct. 24, 2014,
http://www.lawfareblog.com/2014/10/look-who-else-has-drones-isis-and-al-nusra/.
78 | Orbis

The Race for Drones
uncertainty between regional rivals over the long run. Second, as a low-cost,
apparently low-risk form of technology, drones will become increasingly useful to
governments in testing the strategic commitments and the nerves of their rivals.
Even today, a number of governments and rebel groups facing regional rivalries
have started to use drones in ways that chip away at the foundations of previously
stable deterrent relationships.
Third, the worldwide proliferation of drones in
contested airspace, and the increasing risk that a drone will have an accident with a
civilian aircraft, multiplies the chances of a conflict spiral stemming from an
accident or drone misuse. Given these risks, it is in Washington’s interest to take a
leading role in slowing the race for drones and developing new legal, institutional
and normative mechanisms to govern drone usage and sale in the future.
The New Race for Drones
Despite the slow economic recovery in the United States and Europe, the
market for drones is booming worldwide. An estimate by the Teal Group suggests
that drones will remain a global growth industry for the foreseeable future, with
annual sales expected to double from $5.2 billion to $11.6 by 2023.9 There will be
approximately $89 billion spent in research and procurement on drones over the
next decade.10 The majority of the spending—65 percent of the research and
development and 51 percent of the procurement—will come from the United
States. This growth should be contrasted to the worldwide decline in demand for
manned aircraft. The relatively low cost of drones—an MQ9 Predator drone costs
approximately $15 million, compared to $150 million or more for the F-35
aircraft—has made a number of governments around the world turn to them as a
lower cost alternative to conventional aircraft for simple domestic tasks (such as
monitoring borders, countering smuggling and environmental conservation) and a
growing number of military tasks.
The United States has a natural lead in drone export sales due to its
advanced technology and lead in research and development, but in practice it has
sold relatively few drones on the international market.
The total direct military
commercial sales for U.S. drones was $240 million during the period 2005-2011,
with an additional $144 million transferred as part of the foreign military sales
program over nearly the same period.11 Most of U.S. drone sales have gone to
NATO allies, such as the United Kingdom and Italy, although the United States has
been reluctant to transfer its heaviest payload models to any other governments.
9 Unmanned Aerial Vehicle Market Profile and Forecase, 2013, Executive Summary, Teal
Group,
https://dl.dropboxusercontent.com/u/1665888/TGCTOC/DL/2013UAV_TOC_EO.pdf.
10 “Teal Group Predicts Worldwide UAV Market Will Total $89 Billion in its 2013 UAV
Market Profile and Forecast,” Teal Group, June 17, 2013,
http://tealgroup.com/index.php/about-teal-group-corporation/press-releases/94-2013-uav-
press-release
11 “Agencies Could Improve Sharing and End-Use Monitoring on Unmanned Aerial Vehicle
Exports,” General Accounting Office, GAO 12-536, July 2012, p. 11.
Winter 2015 | 79

BOYLE
American exports are restricted by the Missile Technology Control Regime (MCTR),
a voluntary agreement among 34 states which limits the sales and export of heavy
payload weapons, and by the Wassenaar Agreement, which requires participants to
share information on deliveries, especially for dual-use technology.12
U.S. drone manufacturers are lobbying actively to reclassify some drones to
exempt them from MCTR and Wassenaar restrictions and to allow them to tap
growing markets in Asia, Europe and Latin America.13 A 2012 Congressional
Research Service report put the issue succinctly: “Much new business is likely to be
generated in the market, and if U.S. companies fail to capture this market share,
European, Russian, Israeli, Chinese or South African companies will.”14 Worried
that these companies will lose market share to foreign companies, the Obama
Administration has begun to consider expanding the range of states that are
approved for drone sales.15 In draft guidelines proposed by the Pentagon in 2012,
the United States would be permitted to export drones to 66 countries around the
world.16 The administration has come under intense pressure from industry leaders
and members of Congress to export more and to ensure that U.S. suppliers retain a
preeminent share of the global market. This Congressional pressure is partially a
function of the increase in funding from lobbyists associated with the drone
industry. By one estimate, Political Action Committees (PACs) associated with the
drone industry donated $2.3 million to members of the House Unmanned Systems
Caucus in 2011 alone.17 Given this growing political pressure, it looks increasingly
likely that the United States will sidestep these restrictions and begin to sell drones
more widely on the international market.
In part due to the reluctance of the U.S. to sell drones outside its circle of
close allies, the supply of drones has diversified rapidly over the last decade. The
leading state in the export market is Israel. Over the last ten years, a number of
Israeli companies have become leaders in research and development, as well as
global sales in drone technology. Since 2005, Israeli drones exports have totaled
$4.6 billion in sales to a wide variety of countries, including Australia, Singapore,
Turkey, Azerbaijan, Nigeria, Uganda and India.18 According to the Stockholm
International Peace Research Institute, Israel constituted 41 percent of all drone
12 Roderic Alley, “The Drone Debate: Sudden Bullet or Slow Boomerang,” Centre for
Strategic Studies, Victoria University of Wellington, No. 14 (2013), pp. 32-33.
13 W.J. Hennigan, “Drone Makers Urge the U.S. To Let Them Sell More Overseas,” The Los
Angeles Times, July 1, 2012.
14 Jeremiah Getler, “U.S. Unmanned Aerial Systems,” Congressional Research Service, Jan.
3, 2012, p. 28.
15 “U.S. Looks to Export Drone Technology to Allies,” Reuters, March 25, 2010.
16 Doug Palmer and Jim Wolf, “Pentagon OK with Selling U.S. Drones to 66 Countries,”
Reuters, Sept. 6, 2012.
17 Andrea Stone, “Drone Lobbying Ramps Up Among Industry Manufacturers,
Developers,” The Huffington Post, May 28, 2012.
18 UAV Round Up, Aerospace America, July/Aug. 2013, p. 32.
80 | Orbis

The Race for Drones
exports between 2001 and 2011.19 Its Heron model, widely used in Gaza, has
become a default surveillance drone for many states without indigenous production
capabilities.
Israel has also set up a network of subsidiary companies in countries where
there is a strong preference for domestic production.20 As a result of these moves,
Israel now has become the main supplier of drones for many states in Europe, Asia,
South America and Africa. The chief limitation that Israel faces in exploiting the
drones market lies in its geopolitical position. Neighboring Arab states will not
purchase from Israel due to their hostility towards its existence, which leaves an
opening in that regional market that the UAE, China and eventually Russia will
exploit. Israel is also generally careful to pay attention to U.S. sensitivities when
approving exports to Washington’s enemies and less trusted friends. Nevertheless,
Israel has shown itself willing to break with the United States over drone sales to big
markets like China and Russia. In the 1990s, Israel sold China 100 Harpy armed
drones.21 When Israel considered selling an anti-radar attack drone to China in
2005, the Pentagon temporarily shut Israel out of the F-35 aircraft program.22
Similarly, in 2009, the United States objected to an Israeli sale of drones to Russia
according to documents released by Wikileaks.23 In a few cases, Israel has brokered
co-production or service agreements, rather than outright sales, in an effort to
mollify the United States.
While it remains substantially behind the United States and Israel in its
sophistication of its drones, China is now investing heavily in developing a drones
industry with an eye on the export market. It has created an extensive infrastructure
for development of drones for military and civilian use, and is alleged to be
interested in hacking U.S. companies for information on their programs.24 Virtually
every major Chinese arms manufacturer has a research center on drones, and
dozens of different models are in development.25 Most of these are drones for
reconnaissance and combat, but China is also investing in high-altitude, long-range
drones which could extend its ability to engage in surveillance and attack.26 A 2012
report from the Defense Science Board noted that China’s move into unmanned
systems was “alarming,” especially given China’s evident interest in using drones to
swarm U.S. vessels in the event of a naval conflict.27 An estimate of China’s drone
19 Jefferson Morley, “Israel’s Drone Dominance,” Salon, May 15, 2012.
20 Ora Coren, “Israel Aerospace Industries Moving Production to Mississippi,” Haaretz,
Nov. 17, 2009.
21 Edward Wong, “Hacking U.S. Secrets, China Pushes for Drones,” The New York Times,
Sept. 20, 2013.
22 “Report: Israel Frozen Out of F-35 Development,” Defense Industry Daily, April 19, 2005.
23 William Wan and Peter Finn, “Global Race to Match U.S. drone capabilities,” The
Washington Post, July 4, 2011.
24 Edward Wong, “Hacking U.S. Secrets, China Pushes for Drones,” The New York Times,
Sept. 20, 2013.
25 Edward Wong, “Hacking U.S. Secrets, China Pushes for Drones.”
26 William Wan and Peter Finn, “Global Race to Match U.S. drone capabilities,” The
Washington Post, July 4, 2011.
27 Edward Wong, “Hacking U.S. Secrets, China Pushes for Drones.”
Winter 2015 | 81

BOYLE
program from Project 2049 noted that, unlike the United States, China’s goal was to
have drones that were successful in denied or contested airspace.28 This would be
particularly useful in a battle with the U.S. Navy in the East or South China Sea. By
contrast, U.S. drones are more capable of operating in uncontested airspace, such as
that over the less governed territories of places like Pakistan and Yemen. Not
content with just a small-drone, swarming approach, China is also developing its
own iterations of the American Reaper model and recently developed a
sophisticated high-altitude stealth drone, called the Lijian (or Sharp Sword).29
The desire to tap the export market has been among China’s most
important motivations for rapidly catching up in drone technology. Unencumbered
by the Missile Technology Control Regime and the export restrictions faced by the
United States, China sees an extraordinary opening for exporting surveillance and
attack drones to governments to which the United States cannot sell. Zhang
Qiaoliang, a representative of the Chengdu Aircraft Design and Research Institute,
remarked that, “The United States doesn’t export many attack drones, so we’re
taking advantage of that hole in the market. The main reason is the amazing
demand in the market for drones after 9/11.”30 In 2011, China began offering the
Wing Loong (or Pterodactyl) drone for export. This drone is capable of holding
laser guided missiles and equal to the American Predator drone in flight range but
costs only $1 million.31
In September 2013, the China Daily reported that China was making
substantial gains into the drone market, and is negotiating with at least three
governments on Wing Loong sales.32 While there are doubts about the
sophistication and capacity of its models, China’s drones are often significantly
cheaper than comparable American or Israeli models. It also has existing
capabilities in avionics, propulsion and flight control systems that can be adapted
rapidly to drones.33 China is seeking to capitalize on the market for small and
medium-sized drones, especially for countries that are not authorized to purchase
from the United States and Israel. Over time, China could be a powerful force for
the global proliferation of drones, as it has little compunction about selling drones
28 Ian M. Easton and L.C. Russell Hsaio, “The Chinese People’s Liberation Army’s
Unmanned Aerial Vehicle Project: Organizational Capacities and Operational Capacities,”
Project 2049, March 13, 2013, p. 2.
29 John Reed, “Photo of the Week: China’s Got a Stealth Drone,” Foreign Policy, May 14,
2013.
30 Quoted in William Wan and Peter Finn, “Global Race to Match U.S. drone capabilities.”
The Washington Post, July 4, 2011.
31 Edward Wong, “Hacking U.S. Secrets, China Pushes for Drones.”
32 “China Makes Gains in Military-Drone Market, China Daily Says,” Bloomberg News, Sept.
26, 2013.
33 Zhao Lei, “China Gaining Market Share in Military Drones,” China Daily, Sept. 26, 2013.
82 | Orbis

The Race for Drones
to countries with poor human rights records and faces fewer domestic political
restrictions than the United States does in exploiting that market.34
A number of other governments are also seeking to develop their own
drone programs and, if possible, to tap in to the growing international market for
drones. With the exception of the UK, whose drone fleet is closely tied to the
United States, most European governments lag far behind America in the number
and sophistication of their drones.35 The European Commission recently has
expressed concerns that European manufacturers will lose out to American and
Israeli companies due to their vast advantages in research and development.
According to Forecast International, Europe will make up 15 percent of the
worldwide demand in drones in the next decade, but only 3.9 percent of global
production, only slightly more than Israel.36 Nevertheless, European manufacturers
are devoting themselves to UAV production for civilian purposes, and the EU has
recently approved the Perseus program, in which drones will monitor seas and land
borders around the continent. To capitalize on the export market, France,
Germany, Italy and other EU partners have announced the creation of a “drone
user’s club” to pool resources and allow them to develop a Medium Altitude Long
Endurance (MALE) drone.37 The European Defense Agency has also called for the
creation of a “European generation” of drones within a decade.38
Similarly, Russia is behind the curve on drone production but is seeking to
close this gap with a $13 billion multi-year effort to develop military drones by the
end of the decade.39 It also has closed deals with Israel and the UAE for the
purchase of drones, while in August 2013 the Russian Defense Ministry ordered that
the speed of drone development must be doubled over the next decade to capture
its share of the market.40 While it recently scrapped its long-running Skat prototype
and today relies mainly on Israeli-provided technology, Russia recently has begun to
spearhead the production of a new long-range attack drones build along the model
34 Wendell Minnick, “Report: China’s UAVs Could Challenge Western Dominance,” Defense
News, June 25, 2013.
35 The British Ministry of Defense is estimated to have 500 drones, and field models, such as
the U.S.-produced Reaper and the Black Hornet. Additionally, British firms are alleged to
have supplied drone parts for U.S. drone production. See Nick Hopkins, “British Military
Has 500 Drones,” The Guardian, May 6, 2013.
36 Cited in Glennon J. Harrison, “Unmanned Aircraft Systems: Manufacturing Trends,”
Congressional Research Service, Jan. 30, 2013, p. 3.
37 “Euro-UAVs: Europe Opens Drone Club to Compete with US, Israel,” RT.com, Nov. 20,
2013, http://rt.com/news/drones-europe-nato-eu-us-008/.
38 Quoted in “Euro-UAVs: Europe Opens Drone Club to Compete with US, Israel.
39 UAV Round Up, Aerospace America,’’ July/Aug. 2013, p. 35.
40 “Russia Planning to Buy Aerial Drones from the UAE,” Pakistan Defense, 18 July 2013
available at: http://www.defence.pk/forums/arab-defence/265292-russia-planning-buy-
aerial-drones-uae.html, and Voice of Russia, “Russia to Fund Drone Development Through
2025,” Aug. 2, 2013, http://voiceofrussia.com/news/2013_08_02/Russia-to-fund-drone-
development-program-through-2025-0127/.
Winter 2015 | 83

BOYLE
of the U.S.-made Reaper drone.41 Once its technology catches up, Russia will be in
a good position to take advantage of the growing global demand for drones and the
gap in the Middle Eastern market. Like China, Russia is less encumbered by human
rights considerations over its sales of drones and has an opportunity to sell to states
(such as Iran, Syria, and others) that are not authorized for drone sales by the
United States or Israel.
Outside Europe, the drone market is growing as the demand has soared
among a number of states in Africa, Latin America, and Asia. While some states
have been content to buy drones from the U.S., Israel and other major suppliers and
adapt them to their purposes, a range of new suppliers has tried to tap this market.
The Middle East drones market—estimated to be worth $1 billion through 2021—
has been attractive to UAE, which has developed some basic drones and sold them
to countries that will not deal with Israel.42 India has also invested $6 billion in a 15-
year plan to build an indigenous drones program and is alleged to have more than
15 different platforms in development.43 Similarly, Pakistan is investing in its drones
and allegedly has 30 different models in development. South Africa has also
developed a UAV manufacturing capability and has sold some of its Seeker model
drones to Saudi Arabia, which was denied U.S. drones due to export restrictions.44
Other states with small but growing drones programs include Japan, South Korea,
Malaysia, Singapore, Vietnam, Taiwan, Indonesia, and Brazil.
Drones and Surveillance
How will this new drones market affect the international system? The
answer is speculative somewhat, as the effects of the proliferation of drones will not
be known for at least a decade. It is probable that, like most military innovations,
the spread of drones will be uneven and subject to considerable accidents and
failures as new states begin to adapt drones to their own purposes.45 Moreover, as
Shashank Joshi and Aaron Stein pointed out, most states will face a number of
barriers—such as cost, infrastructure, and the development of a doctrinal and legal
framework—that will inhibit their plans to build and operate drones.46 On one
level, this means that the United States will not face direct competition in drone
capabilities for years to come. But equally other states will not use drones in the
way that the United States has used them: as a way of pinpointing and killing
41 Bill Gertz, “Russia to Deploy Long-Range Attack Drone by 2016,” Washington Free Beacon,
Nov. 13, 2013.
42 UAV Round Up, Aerospace America, p. 32.
43 UAV Round Up, Aerospace America, p. 35.
44 UAV Round Up, Aerospace America, p. 36.
45 On the diffusion of military technology, see Michael C. Horowitz, The Diffusion of Military
Power: Causes and Consequences for International Politics (Princeton: Princeton University Press,
2010).
46 Shashank Joshi and Aaron Stein, “Emerging Drone Nations,” Survival, 55:5, 2013, pp. 53-
78.
84 | Orbis

The Race for Drones
terrorist operatives in ungoverned spaces. Rather, for most drone users, the
technology will be adapted to environments marked by contested airspace and
featuring developed world adversaries with competent militaries that can detect and
respond to drone incursions in their airspace. In other words, states are less likely to
replicate American behavior with drones than to find ways to use drones that
provide them with advantages in the context of existing regional rivalries. Their
drone use may not be as sophisticated as the American models, or have the same
global reach, but these qualities may not be necessary given the more limited and
proximate interests of the states that will possess them.
The impact of the proliferation of drones likely will be seen first in
surveillance and reconnaissance. Most major militaries engage in regular
surveillance of the activities of their prospective opponents to look for signs of new
or worrying behavior. Throughout the Cold War, such monitoring and detection
was done through a variety of means, including manned aircraft and satellites and
occasionally rudimentary drones.47 The expansion of the drone technology across
the system, and the gradual improvement in the quality of the technology, will
change the rules of the game as medium and long-range, high altitude drones
become the default method of surveillance between rival states. Over time, they are
likely to supplant manned aircraft, and even some satellites, due to three advantages
that they hold over the alternatives. First, drones can linger over sites of interest to
detect patterns of behavior over time in a way that few satellites can.48 Second,
drones can be adaptable, particularly as they remain under the control of a remote
operator who can redirect them towards points of interest. Third, these drones can
fly closer to the target, thus, allowing for more fine-grained imagery than many
satellites are capable of doing. Combined, these advantages will make high altitude
drones increasingly useful for espionage and surveillance and will gradually change
some of the rules of the game that have governed this activity between states for the
last few decades.
As with much of the history of drone use, the United States has taken the
lead in using drones for surveillance over conflict zones such as Afghanistan and
Iraq. Yet as these wars wind down, the United States is finding a large number of
alternative uses for its surveillance drones. As The Washington Post has reported, its
arsenal of 400 Predators, Reapers, Hunters and other drones now are being directed
to “a mélange of armed groups, drug runners, pirates and other targets that worry
U.S. officials.”49 At present, U.S. surveillance drones are flying over parts of the
Sahara, East Africa, and the Persian Gulf, from bases in Qatar, United Arab
Emirates, Ethiopia, Seychelles and other locations.50 U.S. officials also have directed
47 Abigail R. Hall and Christopher J. Coyne, “The Political Economy of Drones,” Defence and
Peace Economics, Aug. 2013, pp. 1-15.
48 Andrew Rwansley, “Drones and Nuke Spying: A Match Made in Heaven,” Wired, Dec. 15,
2011.
49 Craig Whitlock, “U.S. Military Drone Surveillance Is Expanding to Hot Spots Beyond
Declared Combat Zones,” The Washington Post, July 20, 2013.
50 Craig Whitlock, “U.S. Military Drone Surveillance Is Expanding to Hot Spots Beyond
Declared Combat Zones.”
Winter 2015 | 85

BOYLE
surveillance drones to assist both Turkey and Colombia in fighting insurgencies in
their own borders. For the last several years, the United States has focused the use
of drones against its enemies, such as Iran. The United States also plans to use
high-altitude drones based in Japan to spy on North Korea.51 The Obama
Administration also has begun recently to deploy surveillance drones against the
Islamic State of Iraq and Syria (ISIS) rebel forces.52
While their technology and doctrine lags, other states are joining the United
States in seeking to use drones for close surveillance over more limited geographic
areas. Russia has purchased nearly one hundred drones from Israel and UAE to use
for monitoring borders in the Caucasus, and employed drones for 24-hour
surveillance over the airspace of the 2014 Olympics in Sochi.53 Once its long-range,
high altitude drones are ready in 2018, Russia may decide to replace some manned
overflights over its territory and borders with drones. China has also been using
drones for overflights over the disputed Senkaku Islands in the East China Sea. It is
reported now to be developing a range of surveillance drones to match virtually
every sophisticated American model.54 Japan recently announced that it would
deploy a Global Hawk surveillance drone by 2016, in part to match China’s use of
drones over contested sea regions.55 India has expressed some interest in using
surveillance drones over Kashmir, over its western frontier, the central regions
affected by the Maoist-insurgency, and its coastline, and has made surveillance
drones a focal point of a substantial investment in new technology over the next
decade.56
In the short term, the technological advances of surveillance drones may
have the beneficial effect of reinforcing deterrent relationships between states by
improving the flow of information and reducing the risks of miscalculation. If, for
example, a state is able to track in a detailed way the movement of troops along a
border, and determine that that the movement is a training exercise rather than an
invasion, this may reduce the risk of accidental war. For example, India is deploying
49 hand-held mini-drones along its borders with China and Pakistan to watch troop
51 Denise Chow, “US Military Will Use Drones to Spy on North Korea,” Live Science, Oct. 4,
2013.
52 Chelsea J. Carter, Tom Cohen, and Barbara Starr, “U.S. Jet Fighters, Drones Strike ISIS
Fighters, Convoys in Iraq,” CNN, Aug. 9, 2014,
http://www.cnn.com/2014/08/08/world/iraq-options/.
53 “24 Hour Surveillance to be part of Soviet-Style Security to be Imposed on Sochi
Olympics,” Agence France Presse, Dec. 12, 2013.
54 “China ‘Flies First Stealth Drone,’— Reports,” BBC News, Nov. 22, 2013.
55 “Japan to Launched Unmanned Global Hawk Surveillance Drones in Fiscal Year 2015,”
Japan Daily Press, Jan. 3, 2014.
56 Semu Bhatt, “India’s Indigenous Drones,” Himal Southasian, Oct. 2010,
http://www.himalmag.com/component/content/article/379.html.
86 | Orbis

The Race for Drones
movements, especially in high-altitude regions.57 Such an effort, while fallible, might
provide better intelligence to Indian commanders than they might otherwise possess
and reduce the risk of misperception and conflict. Similarly, the United States is
conducting drone surveillance operations over Iran from its bases in Qatar and
UAE, thus, providing fine-grained details on Iran’s nuclear programs that may help
verify or falsify its claims about the purpose of its program.58 The growing use of
surveillance drones, and the quality of the information that they produce on rivals,
may reduce uncertainty and make accidental war less likely over the short term. Yet
these benefits have to be weighed against the risk of drone accidents, as surveillance
drones are subject to collisions with civilian aircraft which may lead to heightened
tensions or conflict. This is a particular danger in the East China Sea, as both China
and Japan will be fielding drones in a contested airspace.
Over the long term, however, the positive effects of increased drone
surveillance on deterrent relationships are less clear.
As the drone technology
improves the flow of information about what other actors are doing, there will be
pressure for more aggressive (and risky) counter-measures designed to block the
gaze of drones, as well as calls for more aggressive operational security about
controversial activities, such as building nuclear programs. Today, most drones can
be noticed when flying above targets and are countered by a range of simple
counter-attacks. States such as Israel have shot down drones, and a number of
others have scrambled aircraft to force drones to leave their airspace. Iran has also
claimed to have shot down both the ScanEagle and RQ-170 U.S. drones and has
even displayed the wreckage for the international media. Potential American rivals
are considering new steps to ensure that they can take to shoot drones from the sky
if they are detected in their airspace. Russia has developed a new model of its Tor
M2 surface-to-air missile defense system, designed deliberately to shoot down
drones.59 China has also developed a home-made laser defense system capable of
shooting down U.S. drones.60
Another response in the future might be the
development of counter-UAV operations in which drones are developed specifically
for the purpose of detecting and destroying other drones.61 A consequence of a
proliferation of drones might be a dangerous sequence of UAV operations and
counter-UAV strikes by adversaries, thus, setting the stage for conflict spirals and
dangerous accidents.
Non-state actors also have devoted considerable efforts towards thwarting
drones. The U.S Air Force has become concerned that states or insurgents might
57 Pradip R. Sagar, “49 Drones to Keep an Eye in China and Pakistan Borders,” DNA, Sept.
30, 2013, http://www.dnaindia.com/india/1895756/report-dna-exclusive-49-drones-to-
keep-an-eye-on-china-and-pakistan-borders.
58 Craig Whitlock, “U.S. Military Drone Surveillance Expanding to Hot Spots Beyond
Declared Combat Zones,” The Washington Post, July 20, 2013.
59 Voice of Russia, “Russia Developing Anti-Drone Defence,” Nov. 17, 2013.
60 Ishaan Tharoor, “China Unveils a New Anti-Drone Laser, But It’s the Growing Chinese
Drone Fleet That Matters,” The Washington Post, Nov. 6, 2014.
61 John Horgan, “Unmanned Flight,” National Geographic, March 2013,
http://ngm.nationalgeographic.com/2013/03/unmanned-flight/horgan-
text?rptregcta=reg_free_np&rptregcampaign=20131016_rw_membership_n1p_us_se_w#
Winter 2015 | 87

BOYLE
hack drones or use lasers and dazzlers to blind drones in contested environments.62
Al Qaeda has established a cell of engineers working on ways to jam or hijack
American drones that target them.63 A recent publication by al Qaeda in the Islamic
Maghreb identified some low-tech countermeasures for drones, including jamming
the frequency of drone use, using underground shelters, and even burning tires to
generate black smoke.64
Moreover, states will not accept the widespread use of surveillance drones,
and the corresponding loss of secrecy, without a response. One way they may
respond is to go further to ground to conceal their activities and to adopt stronger
countermeasures to block detection of their activities. Russia recently has fielded a
Krasukha 4 radar system designed to block surveillance of ground targets and
emphasized that the system was capable of blocking both Global Hawk and Reaper
drones.65 It is not hard to imagine Iran or North Korea, for example, seeking to buy
similar radar or laser defense capabilities to block U.S. surveillance drones. If that is
not possible, these states may seek to build even more underground nuclear and
military facilities to avoid their gaze. The spread of surveillance drones—and the
corresponding conclusion that one must assume everything is being watched from
the skies—paradoxically may lead these states to become more opaque, not less, due
to aggressive countermeasures and improved operational security over military bases
and sensitive locations. If so, the race for ever-more sophisticated surveillance
drones may increase information asymmetries and generate more uncertainty,
possibly to the point of destabilizing standing deterrent relationships over the long
run.
Testing Nerves
The proliferation of drones to many states carries with it a second set of
risks that have been overlooked in much of the controversy over the U.S. drones
program in Pakistan and Yemen. Even if drones do not produce the illusion that
war can be bloodless and easy, they may subtly change the risk calculations and
behaviors of states and produce incidents that lead to conflict spirals or outright
war. One way this might happen is that states begin to use drones to test the
nerves, and strategic commitments, of their potential rivals.
Drones are a seductive way of doing this for two reasons.
First, because
drones are not manned aircraft, states may calculate that their use is less
consequential and risky than manned aircraft. As David Hastings Dunn has pointed
62 United States Air Force, Scientific Advisory Board, Operating Next-Generation Remotely-
Piloted Aircraft for Irregular War, SAB-TR-10-03, April 2011,
http://info.publicintelligence.net/USAF-RemoteIrregularWarfare.pdf
63 Craig Whitlock and Barton Gellman, “U.S. Document Details Al Qaeda’s Efforts to Fight
Back against Drones,” The Washington Post, Sept. 3, 2013.
64 Sam Bollier, “Fighting Back Against the Drones,” al-Jazeera, July 11, 2013.
65 “Advanced System To Guard Russia from Hi-Tech Surveillance, Drone Attacks,”
RT.News, Nov. 18, 2013.
88 | Orbis

The Race for Drones
out, drones appear as a disembodied threat, which seems to “enable their use with
domestic political impunity, minimal international response and low political risk
and cost.”66 Second, because drones are often physically small, states may calculate
that drones may be able to evade detection in contested space, or at the very least be
able to evade being shot down. The result is that drones are a new form of
technology, particularly conducive to what Alexander L. George referred to as
“salami tactics”—that is, small steps used to probe or test deterrent relationships by
violating commitments in a small but measurable way.67
One example of such behavior occurred in fall 2013, when China surprised
everyone by deploying a drone over the contested Senkaku Islands in the East China
Sea to test Japan’s commitment to its control over the islands.68 Japan scrambled F-
15 fighters in response and suggested that it might station Japanese personnel on the
island in retaliation.
The situation escalated when China extended its air defense
zone in ways that covered these islands and directly conflicted with Japan’s self-
declared air defense zone. Japan approved a plan to shoot down Chinese drones
that flew over the disputed islands, and China responded by declaring that such an
act would constitute “an act of war.”69 In January 2014, Japan announced plans to
deploy three U.S.-made Global Hawk drones by 2015-2016 in an attempt to counter
China’s efforts to claim air and naval dominance in the East China Sea and South
China Sea.70 The result has been an unprecedented level of tension in a relationship
that has remained stable, and largely without such provocative incidents, for
decades.
China’s assertiveness in this incident suggests that those who assumed that
the country would be restrained in its drone use for fear of escalation or
international condemnation might be mistaken.71 The apparent low cost nature of
the technology makes these kind of probing attacks seem more attractive even to a
generally risk-averse government like China.
Drones provide the illusion of a
controllable risk especially if a government can convince itself that the absence of
human casualties from a shoot-down of the drones makes the incident negligible.
Yet apparently negligible incidents sometimes have very real consequences.
The
66 David Hastings Dunn, “Drones: Disembodied Aerial Warfare and the Unarticulated
Threat,” International Affairs 89:5, 2013, p. 1,238.
67 On these strategies, see Alexander L. George and William E. Simons, The Limits of Coercive
Diplomacy 2nd edition (Boulder: Westview Press, 1994). See also Alexander L. George, Forceful
Persuasion: Coercive Diplomacy as an Alternative to War (Washington DC: US Institute of Peace,
2009).
68 Shawn Brimley, Ben Fitzgerald, and Ely Ratner, “The Drone War Comes to Asia,” Foreign
Policy, Sept. 17, 2013.
69 “Japan, China Territorial Tensions Rising Over Unmanned Drones,” Voice of America,
Oct. 31, 2013. The quote “act of war” is from BBC, “Japan Will Stand Up to China, Says
PM Shinzo Abe,” Oct. 26, 2013.
70 “China Considers Revamping Military Regions – Report,” Japan Times, Jan. 1, 2014,
http://www.japantimes.co.jp/news/2014/01/01/asia-pacific/china-considers-revamping-
military-regions-report/#.UsmKIk2A2M_.
71 Andrew Erickson and Austin Strange, “China Has Drones, Now What?” Foreign Affairs,
May 23, 2013.
Winter 2015 | 89

BOYLE
risks of a conflict spiral arising from the shoot-down of the drone or an accident of
some kind in the East China Sea are real and potentially dangerous, especially if
either China or Japan see their national interests or pride at stake in such an
encounter. Now that China appears willing to throw its weight around more in the
Asian region, its use of drones may increase as a way of testing Japanese nerves and
U.S. commitments to its allies.
A similar, but less serious, dynamic has recently come into play between
India and Pakistan. In August 2013, India flew a drone from Kashmir into Pakistani
airspace. Pakistan scrambled its aircraft in response and demanded an explanation
of the violation.72 In October 2014, India announced the purchase of 49 Israeli-
made drones to monitor its borders with Pakistan and China.73 Given this
development, it is not hard to imagine that such limited probes using drones may
become more common between India and Pakistan as both develop their drone
industries and import more drones from suppliers like Israel and the UAE. The risk
of an escalation from these drone flights may be magnified if either chooses to use
drones in or around each other’s nuclear facilities.
The possibility has already become a reality in the Middle East. In October
2012, Hezbollah deployed a retrofitted Iranian drone into Israeli airspace, possibly
to relay information on Israel’s nuclear capabilities.74 Israeli jets shot down the
drone, but Hezbollah remained undeterred. In April 2013, Hezbollah allegedly
deployed another drone, rumored to be examining Israel’s offshore oil fields or
chemical stores near Haifa. While Israel was successful in shooting it down, it was
seen within Israel as another attempt to test its capabilities. It was also considered a
way for Hezbollah to win public relations points by defying Israel without inviting
serious retribution.75 The fact that Hezbollah was willing to test Israel with drones
in this way after its defeat in Operation Cast Lead suggests that it sees them as a
low-cost, low-risk alternative to conventional military engagement.
If Hezbollah
continues to use drones as a way of testing Israel’s resolve, it is likely to find itself in
another round of fighting.
Accidents and Spirals
Another reason to be concerned about the growing drone arms race is the
danger of accidents and the conflict spirals that can come from them. While drones
are becoming more sophisticated, they are still prone to frequent accidents.
72 Zafar Malik, “India Drone Violates Pak Airspace,” The Nation (Pakistan), Aug. 4, 2013.
73 “India Purchases 49 Drones from Israel to Spy on Pakistan and China Borders,” The
Nation (Pakistan), Oct. 26, 2014, http://nation.com.pk/national/26-Oct-2014/india-
purchases-49-drones-from-israel-to-spy-pakistani-and-chinese-borders.
74 Sheera Frankel, “Hezbollah Drone May Have Be Sent to Monitor Israel’s Nuclear Activity
in Dimona,” McClatchey’s, Oct. 12, 2012,
http://www.mcclatchydc.com/2012/10/12/171390/hezbollah-drone-may-have-been.html.
75 Isabel Kershner, “Israel Shoots Down Drone Possibly Sent by Hezbollah,” The New York
Times, April 25, 2013.
90 | Orbis

The Race for Drones
According to an estimate in 2010, the United States has experienced at least 79
drone accidents costing at least $1 million each, as well 38 Predator and Reaper
drone crashes during combat missions in Afghanistan and Iraq.76 Drones such as
the Pioneer and Shadow drones have even higher rates of accidents.77 A later
estimate in 2014 put the total number of major drone crashes at over 400 since
2001.78 Although it is estimated that many of these accidents are caused by human
error, and that accident rate is declining, these rates are still much higher than
comparable manned aircraft.79 It is also probable that less sophisticated and robust
models sold by China and other new suppliers will have a higher rate of accident
than the more robust American models. Simply as a matter of probability, it is likely
that drone accidents will become more commonplace as more drones take to the
skies in the future.
Drone accidents are more than just unfortunate for those who happen to
be hurt by them when they fall from the skies. There is a serious risk that drones
may interfere with civilian aircraft and cause accidents with more substantial loss of
life. In 2004, a German UAV nearly crashed into an Ariana Airlines Airbus A300
carrying 100 people in the skies over Kabul.80 Over the last ten years, drones have
been equipped with anti-collision software designed to avert such crashes, but
dangers remain. One estimate in 2012 found that at least seven U.S. Predator or
Reaper drones have crashed overseas in the vicinity of civilian airports.81 In
September 2013, the United States was forced to move its drone operations from
Camp Lemonnier in Djibouti due to concerns that drones would crash into
passenger planes from a nearby airport.82
This problem has also occurred close to home. In March 2013, a small
private drone came within 200 feet of an Alitalia commercial jet over John F.
Kennedy Airport in New York.83 One year later, an American Airlines jet had a
near-miss with a drone in Florida.84 Drones are particularly dangerous around
civilian aircraft because they are hard to detect on radar and because their owners
are difficult to trace once an incident has been reported. The FAA has launched
76 David Zucchino, “War Zone Drone Crashes Add Up,” The Los Angeles Times, July 6, 2010.
77 Jeremiah Getler, “U.S. Unmanned Aerial Systems,” Congressional Research Service, Jan.
3, 2012, p. 18.
78 Craig Whitlock, “When Drones Fall From the Sky,” The Washington Post, June 20, 2014.
79 Kelsey D. Atherton, “What Causes So Many Drones Crashes?” Popular Science, March 4,
2013.
80 Geoffrey Ingersoll, “Frightening Drone Footage Shows Near Miss With Airbus A300 over
Kabul,” Business Insider, June 3, 2013. Footage revealing this incident was only recently
declassified.
81 Craig Whitlock, “Drone Crashes Mount at Civilian Airports,” The Washington Post, Nov. 30,
2012.
82 Craig Whitlock and Greg Miller, “U.S. Moves Drone Fleet from Camp Lemonnier to Ease
Djibouti’s Safety Concerns,” The Washington Post, Sept. 24, 2013.
83 Patrick Benedict, “Commercial Drones a Serious Safety Concern?” Scripps News Service,
June 6, 2013.
84 Jack Nicas, “FAA: U.S. Airliner Nearly Collided with a Drone in March,” Wall Street
Journal, May 9, 2014.
Winter 2015 | 91

BOYLE
investigations of 23 incidents of illegal drone use near civilian airports or in
proximity to aircraft, but in most cases the owners of the drones have never been
found.85 By 2015, it is estimated that 30,000 drones will be in American skies. A
prominent airline pilots association has expressed concern over this development
and argued that the widespread introduction of drones into domestic airspace could
“profoundly degrade the safety of both commercial and general aviation flight
operations” unless they are integrated into the FAA systems in a comprehensive
way.86
As drones proliferate around the world, the dangers of conflict spirals from
accidents and collisions with civilian aircraft will multiply. With drones in the hands
of more governments and private suppliers, and regulation relatively weak in many
countries, it will be hard to control where drones fly and to keep them away from
civilian aircraft. The rapid expansion of drones into these markets, as well as their
use by private parties in those governments, will increase the risks of an accident
between a drone and civilian aircraft—particularly in countries where the airspace is
less well-regulated than the United States and Europe. For example, in December
2013, Chinese police arrested four men for flying a modified drone into the airspace
of the Beijing airport, causing two flights to be diverted and multiple delays.87
Similarly, it will be harder to keep drones away from sensitive locations where the
costs of an accident might be very high. In November 2014, France arrested three
people for a series of 14 unexplained drone flights near its nuclear facilities over a
three-week period.88
Many drone accidents will be merely unfortunate events, but some will
carry with them a risk of a conflict spiral particularly if the incident is misinterpreted
as an intentional downing of a civilian aircraft. If a U.S. drone struck an Iranian
passenger airliner, for example, it is not hard to imagine the incident causing a
serious international crisis, along the same lines as the accidental U.S. downing of
IranAir Flight 655 in 1988. The risk of a conflict spiral from a drone accident
between India and Pakistan, or Israel and one of its neighbors, should not be
ignored. Similarly, a collision between a Chinese drone and a Japanese civilian
aircraft in the East China Sea could produce disastrous consequences. It is also
possible that insurgents will try to hijack drones and even redirect them for attack in
ways that generate adverse political consequences or spirals of conflict.
In 2009,
Iraqi insurgents managed to hack into the feed of a Predator drone, while in 2011
Iran made a widely-disputed claim that it hijacked a U.S. stealth drone by feeding it
85 Patrick Benedict, “Commercial Drones a Serious Safety Concern?” Scripps News Service,
June 6, 2013.
86 “Unmanned Aircraft Systems: Challenges for Safely Operating in the National Aerospace
System,” Air Line Pilots Association, International, White Paper, April 2011, p. 3,
http://www.alpa.org/portals/alpa/pressroom/inthecockpit/UASWhitePaper.pdf.
87 Chris Luo, “Police Arrest Four in Beijing after Mysterious Drone Forces Diversion of
Civilian Planes,” South China Morning Post, Dec. 31, 2013.
88 Dan Bilfesky, “France Arrests 3 with Drones by Power Plant,” The New York Times, Nov.
6, 2014.
92 | Orbis

The Race for Drones
false GPS coordinates to make it land in Iran itself, rather than Afghanistan.89
Hijacked drones are a particularly attractive way to test the nerves of a potential rival
by a weaker opponent, as they are less traceable and can shield the perpetrator with
some degree of plausible deniability. As drones wind up in the hands of more
unscrupulous actors, and less reliable drones sold by China and others flood the
market, governments around the world will face a vastly increased risk of a conflict
spiral from drone misuse, hijacking or collision with a civilian aircraft.
Limiting the Race
There is no way that the United States or another state can stop the
emergence of a global drones arms race. The genie is out the bottle: there is no
going back to a world where few, if any, states have drones. Yet the United States
can take three steps to manage this drone arms race and stop the unregulated
proliferation of drones from having adverse effects on stable deterrent relationships
and from producing accidents that risk the creation of dangerous conflict spirals.
First, the Obama Administration should rethink its plans to reclassify
drones into categories under the MCTR regime that would enable their widespread
sale.90 Before agreeing to sell drones to the 66 states approved by the Pentagon, the
United State should do a full strategic assessment to determine whether the risk of
selling drones, even to allies, outweighs the potential benefits to industry. It should
also restrict the sale of sophisticated high-end drones and those with long ranges or
capability of flying in high altitude. In addition, the United States should be careful
to restrict or ban sales of drones to states (like Pakistan, Saudi Arabia and others)
that are locked in intense geopolitical or regional rivalries and will use them to test
the nerves of their opponents. America should use its leverage with allies such as
Israel to restrict their sales and ensure that their companies remain effectively
compliant with the MCTR and Wassenaar agreements. Showing restraint in its sales
of drones will not stop a drones arms race, but it may slow it temporarily and buy
the United States time to try to set norms and guidelines for how drones will be
used.
Second, if sales proceed, the administration should consider applying strict
end-user agreements that will regulate how the drones may be used when purchased.
This is important particularly when the purchased drones can be put to multiple
purposes. While enforcement of these agreements will be imperfect, and some states
may simply ignore some end-use restrictions, there is nevertheless a strong incentive
for prospective buyers seeking to maintain their access to U.S. technology to pay
heed to them. Such a step will not ensure that Chinese or Russian drones, for
example, are not misused, but it may impose a limit on the misuse of drones by
states that would prefer to purchase the more sophisticated American technology.
89 Siobhan Gorman, Yochi J. Dreazen, and August Cole, “Insurgents Hack U.S. Drones,”
The Wall Street Journal, Dec. 17, 2009; Scott Petersen, “Exclusive: Iran Hijacked US Drone,
says Iranian engineer,” Christian Science Monitor, Dec. 15, 2011.
90 Katie Spence, “Will Obama Help to Increase Foreign Drone Sales,” The Motley Fool, Aug.
4, 2013.
Winter 2015 | 93

BOYLE
The federal government should also improve its oversight mechanisms for the sale
and use of U.S. drones and ensure adherence to strict licensing and information
sharing requirements within the federal agencies responsible for the foreign sales.91
Third, the administration should consider whether it has an opportunity to
take a leading role in establishing norms for the use and sale of drones abroad. The
U.S. position, as the world’s leading developer of drone technology, provides it with
substantial leverage that it can use to establish some new rules of the game which
might limit the adverse effects of drones on the webs of deterrent relationships that
hold geopolitical and regional rivalries in place. One option might be to back the
development of an international regulatory mechanism, along the lines of the
Convention on Certain Conventional Weapons (CCW), which could establish rules
for how drones may be sold and used.92 Alternatively, the United States could
support the creation of a UN investigative body on drones which would help to
collect information on how drones are used and shame those who use them
carelessly or cruelly. But the United States should seize the opportunity to take a
leading role in developing “rules of the road” for drone use in order to stop conflict
spirals from emerging from accidents or drone misuse.
None of these steps will reverse fully the proliferation of drones across the
international system. But the United States must not stand by and watch as drones
spread across the system with all of the attendant risks that this development would
bring. While it maintains an edge in technology and a position as the world’s most
attractive seller, the United States should think hard about how it can find
ways to limit the race for drones in ways that encourage responsible use
by itself and others.
91 Aliya Sternstein, “State Can’t Track Drone Exports,” Nextgov.com, Sept. 13, 2012.
92 Michael J. Boyle, “The Costs and Consequences of Drone Warfare,” International Affairs
89:1, 2013, pp. 28-29.
94 | Orbis
