Page # 1
Cognitive Robotics 3 (2023) 8-22

 

© Contents lists available at ScienceDirect
COGNITIVE
e Ra
Cognitive Robotics
CHINESE ROOTS -
GLOBAL IMPACT journal homepage: http://www.keaipublishing.com/en/journals/cognitive-robotics/

 

 

Unmanned aerial vehicles: A review

Check for

L_bpdates |

Asif Ali Laghari*", Awais Khan Jumani®, Rashid Ali Laghari‘, Haque Nawaz?

* Department of Computer Science, Sindh Madressatul Islam University, Pakistan

» School of Electronic and Information Engineering, South China University of Technology, Guangzhou, Guangdong, China

© Interdisciplinary Research Center for Intelligent Manufacturing and Robotics, King Fahd University of Petroleum and Minerals, Dhahran 31261,
Saudi Arabia

 

 

ARTICLE INFO ABSTRACT

Keywords: The lightweight Unmanned Aerial Vehicle (UAV) flight activities are constrained, particularly in
Unmanned aerial vehicles the UAV range or activity span and perseverance, by the strategic correspondence link capabili-
Communication

ties. This paper tends to the different overlap issue of trading off a set of mission prerequisites,
the UAV execution parameters, and strategic credibility; thus compromising between the com-
munication load characterized by a crucial, communication link transmitting power necessities,
power accessibility onboard UAV as a weight-restricted parameter, and the UAV security.

Applications

 

1. Introduction

In current years, an outcome of decreased sizes and weights concentrated charges and amplified functionalities of various sen-
sors and devices. The Unmanned Aerial Vehicles are attracting progressively general trendy varied variety of internal submissions
(atmosphere monitoring, surveillance, photography, search-and-rescue, etc.) [1]. Through the marketplace develops and the diver-
sity of applications increases, additional necessities are present-day being compulsory in spreading the flight variety and growing
adaptability toward complex assignments of UAV structures [2].

UAV stands for Unmanned Aerial Vehicle, which is commonly considered to be a drone or an aircraft with no pilot on board.
UAVs can be remote-controlled aircraft [3]. The unmanned aerial vehicle contains cameras, sensors, communication belonging as
well as other payload devices [4]. It was created for military usage, and civilian usage to protect the border. UAVs are widely used
in the military [5]. Unmanned aircraft system manufacturing was started by the United States department of defense (DOD) in 2005
[6]. Presently, leading UAV manufacturing countries are the USA, Israel, China, Iran, and Russia [7]. Rustom series of Indian UAVs
are under development [8]. The Building of a UAV is easier, it is less expensive and it can be created at a reasonable price. UAVs are
made of essential components.

There are two categories of UAV.

ii Fixed Wing UAV
ii Rotatory wing UAV

Fixed and Rotatory wing UAV consists of their strength and weakness.

1.1. Fixed wing UAV

Fixed-wing UAV drones have gained popularity in military and defense applications, and fixed-wing has high speed and heavy
payload [9]. They are not suitable for stationary applications, because fixed-wing UAVs can’t do a close inspection. Fixed-wing UAV

* Corresponding author.
E-mail address: asif.laghari@smiu.edu.pk (A.A. Laghari).

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cogr.2022.12.004

Received 28 August 2022; Received in revised form 24 December 2022; Accepted 25 December 2022

Available online 30 December 2022

2667-2413/© 2022 The Authors. Publishing Services by Elsevier B.V. on behalf of KeAi Communications Co. Ltd. This is an open access article
under the CC BY license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/)


Page # 2
A.A. Laghari, A.K. Jumani, R.A. Laghari et al. Cognitive Robotics 3 (2023) 8-22

drones use a wing to lift themselves in the sky. Fixed-wing drones only use energy to go in a particular direction rather than remaining
in one place in the air. The fixed-wing drone can go on long distances and cover larger areas. And fixed-wing UAV drone can spend
up to 16 h time in the sky because a fixed-wing UAV drone uses a gas engine rather than using an electric engine.

1.2. Rotatory wing UAV

Rotatory-wing UAVs is known as quadcopters, hexacopter, tricopter, and helicopter are the kinds of rotatory wing UAV [10].
Rotatory wing UAV drone is designed for monitoring the ground situation from the air, for instance, detecting and tracking border
state, surveillance of military equipment, and so on [11]. It has been specially created for remote surveillance. Rotatory-wing UAV
drones have limited speed and payload rather to fixed-wing [12]. They can stay in a stationary position in the sky. This UAV can do
a close inspection. The choice of UAV depends on the uses.

UAVs are demonstrated to be a greatly adaptable stage for a variety of applications [13]. With propels in computation, sensor,
communication, and organizing advances, the utilization of UAVs for military and civilian regions has gotten to be greatly well-
known within the last two decades [14]. It could be a moderately simple errand to utilize UAV in an unmanned aerial framework for
expanding communications extend and information conglomeration capability. For occasion, if all communication frameworks are
destroyed in a perilous zone, and there is a sudden got to make organize between rescue groups, at that point UAV can effortlessly
be utilized as a communication transfer between rescue groups to successfully arrange the rescue.

This paper will address the topic of UAV and the start of the art of UAV. Further, it will explore UAV communication system
design, a ground control station (GCS), sensor-based data processing, applications, and security. Limitations of previous work and
challenges of future work are also discussed. Further, we discuss open research issues for future research direction and development
in the field of UAV systems.

This paper is organized into 8 sections. Section 2 is based on the UAV communication system, and Section 3 provides details of
how UAVs are controlled by the ground control system. Section 4 provides data collection from sensors and processing by using UAV,
Section 5 presents the detail of applications, and Section 6 is based on security. Section 7 provides an open research issue, and finally,
in Section 8 we conclude our work.

2. UAV communication system

UAVs are made out of an assortment of fundamental parts [15]. While all segments agreeably play out a particular reason that
adds to operational flight, the most significant segment is the interchanges frameworks. UAV interchange frameworks help rambles
and their administrators to accomplish their ideal outcomes. Without these frameworks, not exclusively would unmanned flight be
viewed as ridiculous, however, it would likewise make gathering and transmitting flying visuals and correspondence information
unimaginable [16].

As UAVs keep on situating themselves as the prevalent airborne information assortment stage over a wide assortment of ventures,
their interchanges frameworks develop relatively insignificance. Without exceptionally versatile and solid interchanges frameworks,
administrators are left with a distinct weakness in getting flying visuals and information [17]. The way things are, RF correspondences
are the most enhanced answer for dependable UAV interchanges frameworks [18]. A mix of their little size, weight, limited force
utilization, and strong correspondence interface makes them the most appropriate answer for most non-military personnel UAVs.

Regular citizen UAV correspondences frameworks normally work on frequencies of 2.4 GHz and 5.8 GHz [19]. UAV correspon-
dence frameworks work by utilizing one recurrence to control the elevated vehicle starting from the earliest stage of a remote pilot
while the other recurrence is utilized to the bar or hand-off First-Person View (FPV) video. By using high-caliber, solid interchanges
join, regular citizen UAVs can hand off airborne visuals and information to those on the ground easily, while as yet staying in flight.

In resistance applications, various sorts of automatons are executed. Resistance rambles fluctuate extraordinarily from non-military
personnel UAVs, as their missions are much of the time longer in length or require striking abilities notwithstanding giving flying
visuals of the combat zone underneath. One worry in the utilization of automatons in barrier applications is the event of sign sticking.
At the point when sign sticking is utilized, this cuts the remote pilot and activities based on visuals of what the automaton is seeing.
While it appears to be an appalling situation, most barrier rambles are built to come back to base after lost correspondence contact.
Barrier administrators have discovered another answer for potential sign sticking — repetitive onboard route frameworks that do not
depend on GPS [20]. By disposing of accessible GPS information, sticking turns into an inconsistent event, permitting protection
automatons to finish their missions and come back to base securely.

2.1. UAV communication design system

The subject of the plan is a lightweight hand-propelled UAV with the most extreme take-off mass of up to 7kgs [21]. The UAV’s
reason for existing is insight, observation, surveillance, and target following for the help of detachment and friends activities. Back-
to-back, the UAV will be outfitted with a balanced camera payload [22]. The knowledge and observation missions can be flown
self-sufficiently, along these lines the payload symbolism and flight progress down-joins are the prime capacities (assignments) of
a UAV’s correspondence framework Stealthiness of a UAV ought to be verified by its shape, shading, and insignificant warm and
commotion outflows [22]. Since the lightweight UAV will have just short continuance in the zone of battle tasks because of the
weight-limited onboard power accessibility, electromagnetic stealthiness is not envisioned. Counteractive action of disguise assault on
UAV, along these lines, UAV control by substances with different expectations, counteractive action of assault on UAV correspondence


Page # 3
A.A. Laghari, A.K. Jumani, R.A. Laghari et al. Cognitive Robotics 3 (2023) 8-22

streams trustworthiness, for example, counteractive action of information inclusion, change, reordering, answer or deferral, as well
as protection of the correspondence classification (listening in) is foreseen with a reasonable lightweight COTS recurrence jumping
handsets, and confirmation techniques between the UAV and its UC.

+ Parts Used for better UAV communication:
+ We want better UAV communication related to the situation, we will have to use the best part for great connectivity to reach the
proper signals.

Sensor:

The sensor is better for our UAV communication application because this sensor is very small and lightweight and has less battery
consumption [23].

ii RF communication:

RF frequency converters and RF filters and RF Bi-directional devices are also essential for UAVs [24,25].

ii Antennas:

There should be high-performance antennas for unmanned aerial vehicle platforms.

ii Propulsion:

Engines, motors, LiPo batteries, propellers, and so on, these accessories help your project in moving..

ii Drone frame:

This frame is composed of nylon and carbon fiber materials [26]. Because of this, it is a stronger and more suitable weight. The
most essential component is the communication system. The UAV communication system assists drones and helps the operator to
obtain the desired result. If we do not use this communication system in our drone, it will be difficult for us to achieve unmanned flight.
We cannot give information about aerial and visual communication without this communication system. And it will be impossible
for us to transmit data by making a collection of data either without this system. The civilian UAV communication system operates
on frequencies of 2.4 GHz and 5.8 GHz. UAV communication system is work by using frequencies to control the aerial vehicle from
the ground.

The author discussed the services of the UAV so that the Aerial communication platform can work on the UAV, and it cannot
support the transmission of information in the Internet of Things (IoT) [27]. However, it consumes less power in wireless devices. On
the other hand, Orthogonal Frequency Division Multiplexing (OFDM) can be enabled in the network where two subcarriers can be
divided into transmission information and energy harvesting. The OFDM can UAV-Enabled network, so the sub-carriers are shared
within two groups for transmitting the information and energy reaping. Similarly, Simultaneously Wireless Information and Power
Transfer SWIPT technology is being proposed by the UAV trajectory and communication design scheme. Furthermore, the author
used the divide and conquers technique to solve the original problem. The first Sub-Problem depends upon the user scheduling,
subcarrier, and fixed UAV trajectory is enhanced power allocations. The second problem has a fixed UAV trajectory, which enhanced
the user scheduling, subcarriers, and power separation. After that, both problems are solved step by step until the predefined accuracy
is achieved. The author worked on the simulation results, so the proposed algorithm is working correctly. However, it does not
guarantee the average harvested energy in the proposed scheme, but it also gives the best normal achievable rate compared to other
flight modes.

UAV enabled Network Communication for further consideration, where Employing Non-Orthogonal-Multiple-Access (NOMA) for
many users [28]. The total power has been taken maximum and minimum ratio related to the total power and bandwidth with UAV
height and width ray limitations. To solve the formulated problem, they have created the Path-Following Algorithm. Moreover, the
Maximum and Minimum rates have been calculated for the orthogonal multiple access (OMA) and dirty paper coding (DPC), so
the developed path following the algorithm has been solved. Furthermore, they have calculated the results, which show the NOMA
outclass OMA and achieves results like DPC. After that, all parameters are connected jointly and observed together. When those results
are compared with all parameters and make their interest in combined optimization, they have faced such types of issues and tackle
them with inner convex. Based on these issues, they have proposed Path-Following-Algorithm for making a better solution. Regarding
these solutions, they have collected positive and best results. An essential thing in these solutions they have used UAV-Enabled for
physical layer security within the communication. They have focused on most of the things as necessary in communication.

The UAV is driven by solar energy that enables multiple terrain users to use reliable communication services [29]. To enhance
the system’s total performance within a specific period, they analyzed the 3D aerial trajectories’ standard configuration. The wireless
resource allocation and initially considered an offline resource allocation method as a performance benchmark, presuming not having
a considerable understanding of the channel gains. Algorithms are formulated as a non-convex mixing integer optimization problem
that considers an ultimate energy storage capability, aerodynamic power usage, solar power production, and users’ quality of service
(QoS) demand. Although the optimization problem has not been convex, it can be efficiently resolved using monotonic optimizations
to achieve optimum 3-dimensional trajectory and power and subcarrier allocation strategy and then concentrate on designing online
algorithms where only real-time and statistical information about the channel gains are needed. The offline scheme drives the optimal
online algorithm for allocating resources. It requires a high complexity of computing systems, therefore needed a sub-optimal iterative
online scheme with low complexity, and based on successive convex approximation. The simulation outcomes show that both of the
online programs provide a similar approach to the performance of the offline benchmark scheme and greatly surpass the two baseline
schemes.

10


Page # 4
A.A. Laghari, A.K. Jumani, R.A. Laghari et al. Cognitive Robotics 3 (2023) 8-22
3. UAV ground control station (GCS)

Now missions are search-and-rescue and investigation, systems of UAV are typically obligatory to work in trendy complex environ-
ments although still presence able to preserve continuous communication with the ground controller station intended for the resolve
of monitoring, reporting, and control [30]. Intended for instance, in high-density or precipitous urban areas, the communication be-
tween UAVs and the GCS can be effortlessly interrupted, producing the GCS to misplace real-time statistics feedback after the UAVs,
foremost to task failure [31]. Besides assignment requires extended flight variety, the communication capacity also is intermittent by
the detachment.

Commercially obtainable up till now economical UAV communique solutions but have several confines that potentially delay
their extensive application. Initially, the communication variety of main public UAV communication resolutions is reasonably short.
Telemetry modules, for instance, 3DR, XBee, Sik2, and extra Wi-Fi modules, which are mutual options for public UAVs, have commu-
nication varieties that are incomplete to insufficient kilometers [32]. Second, this one is problematic to find stable information links
as soon as obstacles, for example, tall buildings, trees, or mountains distinct the UAVs & GSC. In circumstances discussed overhead,
it can be problematic to broaden the mission through only one UAV organized, though keeping charge and organization intricacy
necessities encountered.

To connect the compensations of UAVs in the following circumstances and minimize problems at a similar period, a substitute
resolution is to organize a multi-UAV organization, which might utilize inter-connectivity amongst manifold UAVs to preserve con-
tinuous statement among each UAV and minced control station. UAV communication transmits a solution that was established, that
usages communication and directing to encompass communication variety and avoid problems by low-slung charge [33]. Impartial
stood to progress and assessment proof-of-concept two-UAV organization, which established the capability to communicate wireless
communication. This structure individually contained dual UAVs, then its strategy might put up adding additional UAVs. The edifice
usages unique UAVs by way of statements to communicate a point and permits additional UAVs to function in parts wherever an
unswerving message with a broken-up regulator cannot be recognized. This formation permits statements to stand recognized across
difficulties or else ended reserve more than the diversity of the on-the-ship wireless transceiver, together that will be established
in-ground tests far along. The distinctive application situation of the scheme is revealed. The organization uses a single UAV as a
statement to communicate opinions and permits additional UAVs to work in ranges wherever communication through a pulverized
regulator cannot be recognized.

UAV stands for an unmanned aerial vehicle, this is a simple-view unmanned aircraft in which aircrew is removed and instead of
its computer systems and radio-link are used. In reality, it is more complex than what is shown and this aircraft must be designed
properly and perfectly for more efficiency. Although aircraft is the most important part of it.

The main components of a UAV (unmanned aerial vehicle) are discussed below:

A Control Station (CS), which operates the system, actually it is the interface between the operator and the rest of the aircraft
system.

The Aircraft carrying the payload which may be of many types.

The communication system between the CS (transmits control system input to the aircraft) and resend the data of payload (which
may be of any type) to the CS (control station) this communication is done by the radio transmission.

Some extra equipment which may include maintenance and transportation items.

3.1. Development of GCS

GCS is a system that is a human portable and easy-to-use station [34]. It is specially made for controlling the UAV and communi-
cation system and antenna. Its usual dimensions are 360 x 96 x 96 inches, triple-axle, A trailer is required which is used for loading
and unloading the aircraft, and no other species used this trailer [35]. The trailer is consist of an Uninterrupted Power Supply (UPS),
an Environmental Control System (ECS) used for controlling thermal, providing air supply, and cooling, considering the main part of
the aircraft, a pilot operator, a payload operator, workstations, synthetic aperture radar (SAR), Data exploitation, communications
terminal, radio links, a camera for recording, because of the absence of onboard pilot on the crew, the camera provides the live
imagery recording of all the missions. This camera is attached to GCS. Power to the GCS is supplied by either commercially available
power or by 35 kW generators.

The Pilot and payload operators (PPO) are the main part of GCS because they are providing a first-hand response to the air vehicle
and sensory payload [36]. Data Exploitation Mission Planning and Communication (DEMPC) are used for communication [37]. The
DEMPC workstations are used for the exploitation of data, mission planning, monitoring of the payload, and management of the
system.

Synthetic Aperture Radar (SAR) works for monitoring and controlling the SAR data like limited exploitation [38], or the region-
wise location either in which the region’s boundary vehicle is located. For voice/data Ground Control Station used High frequency,
Ultra High Frequency, and Very High Frequency (HF/UHF/VHF). For hardware, connectivity stations used the TROJAN SPIRIT II
satellite communication terminal.

SATCOM is used for the intelligence connection of the GCS with the vehicle [39]. It has the feature of Automatic Target Recognition
(ATR) technology, using Synthetic Aperture Radar (SAR) so that it identifies the target from the aerial platform on the battlefield; it
is controlled by the Ground Control System (GCS). It is the requirement of the military for the capability of finding the deep strike
objectives.

11


Page # 5
A.A. Laghari, A.K. Jumani, R.A. Laghari et al. Cognitive Robotics 3 (2023) 8-22

One GCS controls one predator. The basic plan was to make a GCS that controls the two predators at one time. One for Vehicles
and one for Ku Band Link (it is the part of electromagnetic (EM) spectrum in the microwave ranges of frequencies from 12 to 18
gigahertz GHz), but it is not included in now a day’s plans.

The development of the Ground Control System is now focusing on the ATR capability so that they are capable of imaging sensors
onboard an unmanned aerial vehicle (UAV) platform [40]. This system makes capable of the GCS giving Day/Night all-weather
imaging at wide-area coverage to expect the search of the targets/enemies in any weather. It will be made by unique algorithms to
automatically work with 99% efficiency.

Now successfully Unmanned Aerial Vehicle (UAV) is made that can detect and identify and locates six (6) high-value mobile targets
at a time using a real-time strip map fine resolution Synthetic Aperture Radar (SAR) with onboard Automatic Target Recognition
(ATR).

The author has developed an android application named Ground Control Station, which displays an easy graphical interface for
controlling the Unnamed Aerial Vehicle (UAV) [41]. In this application, the author has enhanced the quality of function so that the
user can easily monitor GCS media. One of the most exciting things in GCS is to provide navigation information to easily find out the
UAV device’s location on the map. After that, it can be configured as a flight controller like PID. For sending and receiving the data
of both devices in half-duplex, the application can connect to the Multiwii-Flight-Controller. The author has tested the GCS, where
he gets 96.12% data accuracy with a precision level of 0.7%. So the android application of GCS works accurately. Moreover, the
GCS application’s detailed functionality is to navigate by showing the location based on one longitude and latitude data. After that,
the GCS application has the IP Camera which can be connected through any local Wi-Fi connection. The author has measured the
coverage of that Wi-Fi signal, so it found the low coverage where he has pointed some range like 0-100 m.

The internet of things (IoT) has usually been a massive load of data and a broad range of coverage. Mobile-Edge-Computing
(MEC) and UAV-Base Stations have recently appeared as exciting IoT technologies [42]. MEC-Based data processing network has
been recommended. On the bottom layer, distributed sensors with local information produce raw data. UAV-BSs are used to gather
data and execute initial data processing phases when moving as MEC servers. A central cloud obtains analyzed findings and carries
out further assessments. The edge nodes can help stabilize delays to ensure data freshness for online processing requirements. Besides,
restricted onboard energy also imposes limitations on the capacity to manipulate the edges. In low data rates, the amount of edge
processing for energy efficiency is limited. With high data rates, bandwidth would be intelligently reserved for edge data deposition.
Although hovering UAV-BSs has provided a broad and versatile range of services, this leads to a route planning dilemma. This issue is
acknowledged, and comprehensive enhanced learning is applied in this article to design an algorithm for online route planning. Taking
environmental measurements as inputs, a CNN network is equipped to forecast incentives for behavior. Its usefulness is confirmed
in the enhancement of service coverage through simulations. The outcome would assist with the analysis of big data in future loT
[118,119].

4. UAV sensors based data processing

Within the UAV based information collection, there are three sorts of information are collected such as video stream, telemetry,
and ancillary information [43]. Since the collected video is MPEG based encoding stream, to begin with, It should be encoded [44].
For the telemetry information which is recorded by GPS or INS (Inertial Navigation Framework) sensor, they are portrayed with a
distinctive reference outline and require hence formally dressed [45]. Moreover, to pick up well-symbolized GCPs for move UAV
framework or precision estimation of made orthoimage, the USGS DEM (Digital Height Show) and USGS DOQQ (Digital Orthophoto
Quarter Quadrangle) reference picture, These are diverse in both outline venture and determination ought to be co-registered so that
the intelligent estimation of 3D GCPS (Global Climate Points of view Framework) can be executed.

Basically UAV is based on five sensors;

4.1. RGB sensor or camera

Unmanned Aerial Vehicle (UAVs) is inaccessible controlling plane models and RGB cameras installed on the UAV, the cameras
alongside the route sensors, Such as GPS or IMU constitute vital components of the UAV surveying system [46,47]. There are numerous
ranges of RGB cameras accessible within the advertisement and are utilized for diverse applications. Selecting fitting RGB cameras for
the installation on UAVs can be a key to victory. There are some common parameters for selecting RGB cameras. This incorporates
the focal point of the camera (better focal point with less geometric mutilations), determination of the camera, and quality of Charged
Couple Device (CCD)/Complementary Metal Oxide Semiconductor (CMOS) chips (pixel measure and clamor level).

4.2. Multispectral sensor or camera

Multispectral cameras are lightweight [48]. They are one of the vital commonly utilized sensors in expansion to RGB cameras
within the UAV sensors family. The work of this sensor is for experts on vegetation and agribusiness [49]. This camera is utilized to
see the water level in farms such as leaf-level disease assessment [50]. An incredibly good thing about the multispectral sensor is to
pick up information with tall determination (way better than 30 cm Ground Testing Separate (GCD)) that is regularly not feasible in
conventional multispectral [51]. It is distinctive from RGB cameras, as a rule, multispectral cameras come with higher fetches due to
extra equipment required for wiring extra groups to the RGB groups.

12


Page # 6
A.A. Laghari, A.K. Jumani, R.A. Laghari et al. Cognitive Robotics 3 (2023) 8-22
4.3. Hyperspectral sensor

Hyperspectral sensors are utilized to capture pictures with hundreds of limit groups (5-10 nm transmission capacity) [52,53]. Most
of the hyperspectral sensors are direct cluster cameras [54]. Hyperspectral sensors capture tall volumes of data which are greatly
valuable for numerous applications [55]. More often than not, lightweight hyperspectral cameras come with half unearthly ranges
(400 nm to 1100 nm or 1100 nm to 2500 nm) as compared to aerial hyperspectral cameras. It is not troublesome for UAV based
Hyperspectral sensors as with a few exertions in the flight plan and at the cost of the restricted ground scope. The determination of
procured pictures can reach up to 2 cm to 5 cm levels or lower.

4.4. Thermal infrared sensor

The sensor is additionally lightweight [56,57]. These are of the mid-range inactive sensors whose wavelength is between (3um to
35um). They are majorly utilized within the measurement of surface temperature and thermal outflows estimation. The fundamental
issue of motor temperature and emissivity assurance is through the concentration and its conveyance. The utilization of thermal
sensors is regularly utilized for real-time with an earlier choice of the qualified capture rate [58]. Thermal information can be utilized
for numerous agrarian and natural applications and others utilize the thermal camera.

Hypothetically, the geometric demonstration of a thermal camera is entirely proportionate to that of a standard point-of-view
camera [59]. On the inverse hand, the warm film commonly goes beside a parcel of fewer textures than the RGB pictures and modern
photogrammetry or structure from the movement strategy can come up short since of the deficiency of interest points. Subsequently,
once the geometric perspectives of the camera square measure concerned, it’s counseled to claim an RGB camera stamp and stuck
relative to the thermal camera and take pictures at the same time for the utilization of default the postures of the thermal camera.

4.5. LIDAR

LIDAR (Light Detection and Ranging) Sensors are moreover known as one of the foremost exact ways for geometric information
picking up [60]. These sensors are broadly utilized in ranger service, Social legacy, and Building Data Modeling (BIM). The portable,
the scholarly world, and earthly LIDAR these days have been made in both the industry and the scholarly community. The GPS or IMU
(Inertial Measurement Unit) sensors in UAVs are frequently wrong concerning the sensor determination, so that’s why the stage is
additionally more unstable when flying. In this way, indeed with well-calibrated light-weight LIDAR sensors, the gotten reason clouds’
precision is generally low. It is detailed that profoundly exact UAV-borne LIDAR frameworks are as a rule coming with differential
GPS stations [61]. Where the tall exactness GPS estimations are gain able. The fetching of LIDAR sensors is generally low.

It is illustrated that UAVs are commonly used in several fields, and formation flights for UAVs are also steadily introduced [62].
However, several commonly-used UAVs are still hard to handle with the distributed theory of formation control. These models and
control laws have been checked and validated in MATLAB/Simulink and exported to C++ code and implemented in the Qt-based
simulation framework and Ground Control System (GCS) with the manual disruption of the communication. The simulation framework
offers UAV state data, and the GCS depicts it as Human-Machine-Interface (HMI) for presenting state data and implementing control
laws for formation flights. Any UAV can perform formation flights unchanged under centralized GCS control. The formation control
algorithm is strongly correlated with the network topology, and a virtual-leader-based consensus formation control algorithm is
implemented with a centralized structure. The GCS was responsible for the formation control algorithm and the surveillance of the
UAV’s status to prevent collisions and act as an HMI to offer adequate user-friendly graphical user interface (GUI) information of
UAV and minimize pilot workload. The UAV model and control algorithm was then translated to C++ code and implemented in
the Qt-based simulation platform and GCS after validation on MATLAB/ Simulink. The GCS offers a user-friendly GUI and powerful
management of UAVs. The isolation of GCS from the simulation framework enables it to be extended in the future to semi-physical
or physical simulations.

4.6. UAV LiDAR sensor for forensic evidence detection

UAVs are used for data collection using the LiDAR approach with high accuracy [113]. LiDAR systems in UAVs assist to improve
the understanding and planning for urban infrastructure management and allow geometrical extraction and spectral detection. Pho-
togrammetry is the study of science that measures photographs and provides information about the drawing, maps, and 3D models
for objects of real-world scenarios. UAVs use LiDAR technology which uses Ultraviolet-rays, visible light, and IR light for close ob-
jects. The UAVs that used IR light for imaging are more suitable for forensic applications. UAVs having LiDAR systems are capable
to collect high-quality photographs of the scene, and searching the evidence through videotaping for mapping and reconstruction of
crime scene investigation. The conventional procedure of crime investigation is consuming time extensively, However, introducing
the novel technique and application of UAV is a powerful tool for forensic investigations. The UAV can be used as a multipurpose tool
for crime investigation through videotaping, photography, and searching evidence by examining the sites, and assessments where it
is hard to reach, however, it is a tremendous technique to deploy the UAVs for forensic investigations [114].

13


Page # 7
A.A. Laghari, A.K. Jumani, R.A. Laghari et al. Cognitive Robotics 3 (2023) 8-22

 

 

---=-: U-T-1 Communication Infrastructure

 

 

 

Fig. 1. Single group UAV swarm [116].

4.7. UAV swarm concept

The UAV swarm concept presents a group of unmanned aerial vehicle UAV carries out robust operation in a self-organized way
to complete the mission [115]. The current inclination of the development of UAVs and UAVs technology indicates that the swarm
of UAVs spontaneously establishes communication, which is decentralized in nature.

Several routing protocols and networking techniques were developed and studied to improve the performance of the network.
To make ensure the stability, and dependability of unmanned aerial vehicles, numerous researchers provided different concepts,
architectures, and topologies that have made significant progress for autonomous communication for the specific scenario. In ad-
dition, the strategies of UAV swarm collaboration play an important role in reliable communication. the decentralized approach to
communication provides the platform for UAVs to communicate intelligently.

Under the umbrella of decentralized architecture, the swarm of UAVs performs real-time communication in Adhoc mode by
eliminating the restriction of communication range and infrastructure dependence. The decentralized architectures of a swarm of
UAVs are single-group swarm ad-hoc networks (SGSAN), multi-group swarm Adhoc networks (MGSAN), and multilayer swarm Adhoc
networks (MLSAN) [116].

The swarm of UAV communication made the progress towards cloud-based and satellite-based communication and triggers the
information. The current trends of research focused on the security area of a swarm of UAV communication Fig. 2, Fig. 3, Fig. 4.

 

   

—T— : U-T-U Communication

——=—=: U-T-l Communication

 

 

Infrastructure

 

Fig. 2. Multi-group UAV swarm [116].

14


Page # 8
A.A. Laghari, A.K. Jumani, R.A. Laghari et al. Cognitive Robotics 3 (2023) 8-22

 

o =
_ \
&y Fa BH:
B #&
Ab
&

—Zl— + U-T-U Communication

= ==: G-T-G Communication

 

 

 

 

U-T-l Communication Infrastructure

 

Fig. 3. Multilayer UAV swarm [116].

 

Fig. 4. UAV Swarm Concept [116].

5. UAV applications

After the invention of UAVs or drones, there is a dramatic change in some industries and businesses and this made so many works,
procedures, and difficult things too easy. If we say that now drones can make your business, and your daily life work and some rescue
organizations are widely used in the military for monitoring and some other purposes.

5.1. Aerial photography

Drones are now widely used for capturing footage that can do the same work, which was done by highly expensive helicopters
and cranes [63]. Fast and 4k cameras, action cameras, and sci-fi scenes are filmed by aerial drones, making all this capturing and all
other cinematography easier. This UAV or Drone flying device is also widely used for real estate and sports photography purposes.
Journalists are now also taking this under consideration the usage of drones for capturing footage and videos in live telecasts.

5.2. Shipping & delivery

Big E-Commerce giants like Amazon, Alibaba, DHL, and some other big eCommerce and delivery companies are in favor of drone
delivery [64]. UAVs can save a lot of time can deliver on time in a short period, and will not be affected by any traffic conditions.
Besides, they can also be used for small distances to deliver small parcels, meals, and some other orders which must be delivered
[65].

5.3. Natural scenery
The interesting application of the UAV is to capture the natural scenery and locations, which we cannot reach there or cannot

climb over this like coastlines and beaches, tops of the mountain, and islands in the sea. UAVs are used to map large and huge crowded
places [66,67].

5.4. Management of disaster
UAV provides real-time quick response, whenever there is a natural or man-made incident like something or any disaster, to
monitor that place from an aerial view and can navigate for the injured persons [68,69]. The equipment and devices used in these

conditions are at high definitions and are less with high definitions of cameras, sensors, and radars to give exact information or view

15


Page # 9
A.A. Laghari, A.K. Jumani, R.A. Laghari et al. Cognitive Robotics 3 (2023) 8-22

to rescue teams. Since the large vehicles or devices are like a helicopter cannot reach in narrow or cannot get an analyzed closeup
view of any place.

5.5. Agriculture purposes

UAV technologies are now also enabling farmers and are dramatically changing the industry of agriculture by Lessing Agriculture
with modern technology farmers [70,71]. Agriculturalists are now using drones and UAV devices to monitor their large widespread
corps in a very cheap and very effective way and can also react to the health of any corps by getting alarmed to the farmers with the
sensors, which are attached to the drones. According to some reports now 80 percent of agriculture will be monitored by drones and
UAV devices.

5.6. Weather forecast

Drones are also developed to use for the monitoring of dangerous and sometimes unpredictable weather situations [72,73]. As
these devices are cheap, so they can be sent into tornadoes and hurricanes so that specialists and weather forecasters got some new
insights into the behavior of weather. Sensors used in drones are helping to detail weather parameters and check the situation and
monitor the weather.

5.7. Wildlife monitoring

Wildlife monitoring was a headache to monitor a whole park or any forest to prevent animals to be hunted or any unpredictable
situation, but UAVs made it easy to monitor a whole area within seconds or minutes [74].

5.8. Law enforcement

Nowadays UAVs are also widely used for maintaining the law and enforcing the situation in the city [75,76]. It helps the orga-
nization, which has the responsibility to maintain law and order to enforce the situation in the city with the surveillance of large
crowds and to make sure the safety of the public. They also help them to assist in the monitoring of the very criminal and illegal
activities and things in the city.

5.9. Entertainment

UAVs are being used to develop and provide entertainment for users and people so that they can also be used in nightclubs and
for some entertainment purposes [77,78]. More than those artificial intelligence-based drones are used in several ways to capture
your videos and photographs from a distance and can also be moved as you will step forward or backward.

Other applications of commercial UAVs are parcel delivery or mapping and rescue. The analysis report provided by Tractica that
the usage of multicopters and drones will increase in the future in the cooperate sector. For the current year, they estimate the market
volume to be 392,000 drones worth US$1.6 billion. Sales and revenue are set to multiply by 2025. North America is by far the largest
market for commercial drones, followed by Asia and Europe. Fig. 1 shows the sale of UAVs past and future [79] , Fig. 5.

 

Commercial Drones are Taking Off

Projected worldw

 

for commercial drones

 

je market g

Revenue (in billion U.S. dollars) J Drones sold (in thousands)

06 os. w 6 2 3.6 > 7.6 10.1 12.6

a * 2,329
1,909
IZ “
996
634 LJ
245 mama a
on oo i

2016 ©2017 «2018 += 2019-2020.» 2021 «2022S «2023S 2024 = 2025

CC statista%”

 

 

 

Fig. 5. Sale of UAV according to Tractica [79].

16


Page # 10
A.A. Laghari, A.K. Jumani, R.A. Laghari et al. Cognitive Robotics 3 (2023) 8-22
5.10. Military purpose

UAVs’ military applications are specific for different operations, which provide intelligence about combat. It is used the concept
of a swarm of UAVs to collect information about military operations. Slight unmanned aerial vehicles are used for bomb recognition.
These UAVs were developed by the US to alert the military to save human beings. It can be used for reconnaissance of foes’ activity.
UAVs are very important to perform surveillance of the larger geographical area. The swarm of UAVs can be deployed in unsafe areas
for provisioning information about the security. UAV technology is the economical solution for these military applications in modern
times [117].

The author has investigated the performance of their Small-Sized and Mid-Sized UAVs, which tends to improve the automatic
process with a higher degree of self-independence [80]. On the other side, it improves system issues and closed system solutions.
Significantly, the survey shows the machine’s performances from the sensor data, which assesses the limited inheritance of the
algorithm, we’re changing the environmental conditions with different types of function variations. They have collected the results,
which show not much better reliability. The author has investigated the performance, so they have mentioned some critical parameters
for collecting results. They have made predefined parameters that can improve the results, and it is expected maximum performance.
These results’ essential objectives are to enhance the quality of flight routes for the UAV and agree to permit efficient using the sensor
system. The author has used the Pareto optimization method to improve the flight route and Pareto’s actual method, which has been
set for the current flight.

The author has discussed the development of a decision-making multi-UAV architecture in conjunction with real UAVs and WSN
experiments developed as part of the AWARE Project [81]. Various tasks have also been mentioned in this document, including
multiple UAV surveillance, sensor deployment, and confirmation of fire threats. To avoid redundancies, only discrete features have
been emphasized, rather than defining the complete architecture’s operation for each task. The objectives’ execution addresses core
problems in multi-UAV systems, including the distributed allocation of the task, dispute resolution, and plan refining. A collaborative
framework has also been introduced for multi-UAV coordination in challenging situations like disaster management and national
security. The trials show that its enhanced architecture enables us to carry out a broad range of activities: tracking, deployment
of sensors, fire recognition, and extinction. The incorporation phase of autonomous vehicles from several manufacturers and study
groups was one of the architecture’s main features, which allowed various types of UAVs to be integrated with the least development
efforts during the AWARE project. However, various tasks implementation and shutting and restarting of the HMI framework have
not impacted the platform output because of the distributed decision-making system. Due to any communication layer constraints’
unavailability, collaboration between the UAVs could be achieved through a distributed approach.

6. UAV security

The UAVs use network of a service provider for data transmits to the organization and from the ground station [82]. These UAVs
use different types of communication technologies such as GPS, Infrared, Bluetooth, Wi-Fi, and ZigBee, but these network technologies
are open to security attacks from hackers [83,84]. Recent reports are proof that security attacks were launched on a UAV to control
its interface by “channel hop” attack.

The WiFi and GPS Jammers are also used to launch attacks to destroy communication of UAVs, such attach are GPS spoofing
6, which is used to fool the receiver of data by sending fraudulent signals [85,86]. It makes data distorted for the program, which
is running the UAV or devices or terminal, which is associated to open Wi-Fi systems in airplane terminals, cafes, and preparation
stations.

It extricates client data such as usernames, and passwords. The level of attack will proceed to rise, and manufacturers, as well as
governments, should make a collective endeavor to defend these frameworks against attacks. Besides, regulations on transportation
ought to be executed to give security rules and preparation ought to be given to clients of UAVs. The security officers should be
conveyed to maintain the security of these devices and civilians utilizing them. Better regulation and limitations on utilization ought
to be upheld by UAV manufacturers on their items. Privacy of individual information should be kept up, and security should be
regarded to maintain a strategic distance from interruptions.

6.1. Hacking methods

The term hacking is referred to controlling another system or network to copy or destroy data or use it for its benefit. Hacking
attacks are mostly applied on wireless networks, and different hacking procedures are used to control the UAVs of a legitimate user
[87]. Few hacking methods and attacks are given.

6.2. Trojan horse virus

It is another type of attack on UAV, it could be malicious software or code monitor activity on the network and have negative
impacts by destroying hard drives and records of a system [88]. This attack has a high impact not limited to one system but increased
rapidly and creates more destruction. It provides facilities for the hacker to control systems from a remote location. The most efficient
way to avoid these hazardous attacks is by using malware software within the system.

17


Page # 11
A.A. Laghari, A.K. Jumani, R.A. Laghari et al. Cognitive Robotics 3 (2023) 8-22
6.3. Distributed denial of service

A DDoS attack could be a large-scale interruption strategy performed by a have source that causes negative impacts to legitimate
clients by withholding services once the attacker picks up get to the system, modern instruments can be utilized to pick up control of
the have [89]. Infected systems proceed to search for other vulnerable systems and attack them.

6.4. Password theft

Password theft is another way of breaching of security of UAVs. Passwords are based on the 8 to 16 characters of the keyboard
and, they may consist of words, special characters, lowercase letters, and numbers to ensure security [90]. This major problem is that
complex passwords are difficult to remember. However, complex passwords are also difficult to crack. Dictionary attacks check for
open ports and utilize a list of common words from the dictionary to perform the attack.

6.5. Man-In-The-Middle attacks

This type of attack is launched to gain control of two parties’ communication middle networks for a copy or modification of
sensitive data [91]. The client does not know about data manipulation, which is performed by the attacker. Typically MITM attacks
are based on the scam email to misguide the client or emails which misguide the client to a fake site [92]. Other forms of MITM
attacks are URL manipulation, the rogue domain name server (DNS) and address resolution protocol (ARP) poisoning, and duplication
of media access control (MAC).

6.6. Intrusion detection systems

This is another way of attack to enter the system without the permission of the owner and utilize the resources or block the
resources [93]. The system will be cheated due to attacks and give access permission to an intruder [94]. Intrusion detection is
the act of supervising and identifying indications of abnormal activity. Mostly firewalls, encryption techniques, and authentication
methods are used as the first barrier to a secure system.

6.7. Defense against hacking

Many techniques are available to secure the UAVs from threats or access to information from a hacker, and prevention or action
can be taken suitable actions when found attacks [95]. There are few solutions are given in this section that will be used for enhancing
the security of UAVs.

a) Encryption
b) Defense against DDoS
c) Intrusion detection systems (IDSs).

6.8. Encryption

Encryption techniques are used to change the actual text into an unreadable form to secure information on the network [96].
Encryption encoded data that only can be read by the actual user. It is used as an obstacle against unauthorised activities by hiding
information about resources such as card data, social security numbers, and debit cards.

6.9. Defense against DDoS attacks

There are many methods are available to avoid DDoS such as preventive and reactive methods [97]. The reactive methods are
used to recognize the attack and then prevent the damage. They are also called “Early Warning Systems” A database of well-known
attacks is used to compare and identify incoming attacks.

Similarly, the author has presented a protocol that is based on a stochastic game-based model [98]. So in this system, security
is a significant problem where it cannot be aware of the attacker’s information, so it was the author’s challenge. He has used false
data injection attacks through the operator, but still, it was a challenge. Therefore, he has built the model as a Delayed-Action-
Game (DAG), which can easily use off-the-shelf tools and overcome the security-aware H-UAV model. On the other hand, he has
worked on UAV’s hidden information range. After that, he implemented that protocol on real human activity that can easily find
the operator’s geolocation. Moreover, the author has implemented the machine learning technique inside his model, where it has
collected experimental data, which receives the geolocation task and process it with their geographical features. The author has
represented his unique H-UAV protocol through the case study. So, in this case, study, experimental results have been tested and
operated by humans. Such type of experimental results has been evaluated with subjective feedback. The DAG has performed parallel
computation so it can reduce the time of processing.

18


Page # 12
A.A. Laghari, A.K. Jumani, R.A. Laghari et al. Cognitive Robotics 3 (2023) 8-22
7. Open research issues

UAV networking is an important part of the system, which must be able to provide QoS services but still, no efficient routing
protocol is available for better path communication [13]. The energy efficiency-based multicast routing protocols must be developed
for communication because a high amount of energy is consumed during the data transmission and reception, and during UAV
hovering. QoS service delivery is a big issue in UAV communication, so future research must design and develop new algorithms to
avoid delay and reroute [99,100]. Link constancy is also a major issue in UAV communication because of the hovering of the UAV
system, it causes problems connecting every time with the base station further research work is required in the area to improve link
stability [101].

Nowadays, UAV systems are used in real-time video streaming in sports broadcasting, and service delivery with quality of expe-
rience (QoE) to end-users is an issue for service providers [102,103]. The QoE domain is based on the user’s satisfaction, so every
organization adds this feature to get feedback from the user to improve services for them, they will remain a permanent customer
but adding a QoE domain in the UAV system is also a major issue [104,105,120]. In this regard Laghari et al. Proposed a QoE model
for a UAV environment for QoS service delivery, however, the proposed model is not implemented in a real-time environment [106].

UAV systems use the battery for hovering and energy purposes, with the battery they have a short time for the flight and also
power consumption in communication and video recording cameras [107]. Limited energy of UAV is also a problem for real-time
streaming and monitoring so the solar-based body of UAV system will be a better idea to implement to recharge in hovering time so
it will also increase the time of operations in agriculture field where work is held in the day time [108].

Ground station control Checks again and again the reliability of the network’s architecture and simulates the controlling of vehicles
[109]. Control of better UAV systems required the development of more efficient algorithms currently available did not sufficient
for this operation [110]. The GCS must notify if vehicles are in collision with each other or any other substance and guide for an
alternative path to avoid a collision, this also required more power GCS which controls all information with the improved user
interface [111,112].

8. Conclusion

In this paper, we reviewed UAV systems and communication design, and methods used to connect and send data to the ground
station. Further, we discussed data processing via sensors and applications with security. We provide key definitions and concepts of
UAV systems and details of the development of communication systems and GCS. We provide reviews and analyses of the security of
UAVs and the types of attacks that are launched to disturb the communication of the UAV system. Finally, open research areas are
given for further development of the UAV system and communication, which leads to better UAV technology for the industry.

Authors’ contributions in relation with your submission

(This is "Applicable'—Who made your manuscript and did the research?). Kindly provide complete list of all authors (names or
initials) and each contribution in your "Authors’ contributions" section.
The following authors contributed equally to all aspects of the study:

1 Asif Ali Laghari PhD., is assistant professor at Sindh Madressatul Islam University, Pakistan. Email: asif.lghari@smiu.edu.pk .

2 Awais Khan Jumani MS., is Assistant Professor at ILMA university, Karachi, Pakistan.

3 Rashid Ali Laghari, Ph.D., is a postdoc researcher at King Fahad University of Petroleum and Minerals Saudi Arabia.

4 Haque Nawaz Lashari PhD., is lecturer at Sindh Madressatul Islam University, Pakistan.

5 Funding (Information that Explains whether and by Whom the Research was Supported) The authors declare that no funds, grants,
or other support were received during the preparation of this manuscript.

Code or data availability (Software application or custom code)

Not applicable.

Declarations
Ethics approval

(Include Appropriate Approvals or Waivers) Not applicable — No animals, including humans, were studied in any way during the
writing of this paper.

Consent to participate (Include appropriate statements)

This study did not involve any 3rd party participation. All authors consent to participation.

Consent for publication
(Include Appropriate Statements) This study did not involve any 3rd party participation. All authors consent to publication.

19


Page # 13
A.A. Laghari, A.K. Jumani, R.A. Laghari et al. Cognitive Robotics 3 (2023) 8-22

Declaration of Competing Interest

(Include Appropriate Disclosures) The authors have no relevant fnancial or non-fnancial interests to disclose.

References

O)
[2]

[3]

[4]
[5]
[6]

[7]
[8]

[9]
(10)
m1)
02)
113)
4)
us)
t6)
a7)
us)
09)
[20]
(21)
(22)
[23]
[24]
[25]
[26]
(27)
[28]
[29]
[30]
(31)
(32]
[33]
[34]

[35]
[36]

[37]
[38]

[39]

Phil. Chamberlain, Drones and Journalism, 4, Taylor & Francis, 2017.
Vu Phi Tran, Fendy Santoso, Matt Garratt, Sreenatha Anavatti, Distributed Artificial neural networks-based adaptive strictly negative imaginary formation
controller for unmanned aerial vehicles in time-varying environments, IEEE Trans. Ind. Inf. (2020).

Nicoletta Bloise, Stefano Primatesta, Roberto Antonini, Gian Piero Fici, Marco Gaspardone, Giorgio Guglieri, Alessandro Rizzo, A survey of unmanned air-
craft system technologies to enable safe operations in urban areas, in: 2019 International Conference on Unmanned Aircraft Systems (ICUAS), IEEE, 2019,
pp. 433-442.

Nahina Islam, Md Mamunur Rashid, Faezeh Pasandideh, Biplob Ray, Steven Moore, Rajan Kadel, A review of applications and communication technologies for
Internet of Things (IoT) and Unmanned Aerial Vehicle (UAV) based sustainable smart farming, Sustainability 13 (4) (2021) 1821.

David Nodland, Hassan Zargarzadeh, Sarangapani Jagannathan, Neural network-based optimal adaptive output feedback control of a helicopter UAV, IEEE
Trans. Neural Netw. Learn. Syst. 24 (7) (2013) 1061-1073.

C.A. Mendenhall, Integrating the Unmanned Aircraft System Into the National Airspace System, National Defense Univ Norfolk Va Joint Advanced Warfighting
school, 2011.

Michael J. Boyle, The race for drones, Orbis 59 (1) (2015) 76-94.

Rajesh Mahadevappa, T. Virupaksha, L.N. Raghavendra, A practical approach to enhance the flight endurance of a fixed-wing UAV, in: Proceedings of the
National Aerospace Propulsion Conference, Singapore, Springer, 2020, pp. 297-309.

Navid Ali Khan, Noor Zaman Jhanjhi, Sarfraz Nawaz Brohi, Anand Nayyar, Emerging use of UAV’s: secure communication protocol issues and challenges, in:
Drones in Smart-Cities, Elsevier, 2020, pp. 37-55.

Omar LDallal Bashi, W.Z. Hasan, N. Azis, S. Shafie, Hiroaki Wagatsuma, Unmanned aerial vehicle quadcopter: a review, J. Comput. Theor. Nanosci. 14 (12)
(2017) 5663-5675.

Aakif Mairaj, Asif I. Baba, Ahmad Y. Javaid, Application specific drone simulators: recent advances and challenges, Simul. Modell. Pract. Theory 94 (2019)
100-117.

Alireza Malehmir, Lars Dynesius, Kent Paulusson, Alex Paulusson, Henrik Johansson, Mehrdad Bastani, Mats Wedmark, Paul Marsden, The potential of ro-
tary-wing UAV-based magnetic surveys for mineral exploration: a case study from central Sweden, Lead. Edge 36 (7) (2017) 552-557.

Telmo Adio, Jona Hruska, Luis Padua, José Bessa, Emanuel Peres, Raul Morais, Joaquim Joao Sousa, Hyperspectral imaging: a review on UAV-based sensors,
data processing and applications for agriculture and forestry, Remote Sens. 9 (11) (2017) 1110.

Kai Daniel, Christian Wietfeld, Using Public Network Infrastructures for UAV Remote Sensing in Civilian Security Operations, Dortmund University (Germany
FR), 2011.

Ramon A.Suarez Fernandez, Jose Luis Sanchez-Lopez, Carlos Sampedro, Hriday Bavle, Martin Molina, Pascual Campoy, Natural user interfaces for human-drone
multi-modal interaction, in: 2016 International Conference on Unmanned Aircraft Systems (ICUAS), IEEE, 2016, pp. 1013-1022.

S. Sudhakar, Varadarajan Vijayakumar, C. Sathiya Kumar, V. Priya, Logesh Ravi, V. Subramaniyaswamy, Unmanned Aerial Vehicle (UAV) based Forest Fire
Detection and monitoring for reducing false alarms in forest-fires, Comput. Commun. 149 (2020) 1-16.

Zhipeng Zhou, Javier Irizarry, Ying Lu, A multidimensional framework for unmanned aerial system applications in construction project management, J. Manage.
Eng. 34 (3) (2018) 04018004.

Riccardo Costanzi, Davide Fenucci, Vincenzo Manzari, Michele Micheli, Luca Morlando, Daniele Terracciano, Andrea Caiti, Mirko Stifani, Alessandra Tesei,
Interoperability among unmanned maritime vehicles: review and first in-field experimentation, Front. Robotics AI 7 (2020).

Jafet Morales, Gerson Rodriguez, Grant Huang, David Akopian, Toward UAV control via cellular networks: delay profiles, delay modeling, and a case study
within the 5-mile range, IEEE Trans. Aerosp. Electron. Syst. 56 (5) (2020) 4132-4151.

Michael Warren, Melissa Greeff, Bhavit Patel, Jack Collier, Angela P. Schoellig, Timothy D. Barfoot, There’s no place like home: visual teach and repeat for
emergency return of multirotor UAVs during GPS failure, IEEE Robotics Autom. Lett. 4 (1) (2018) 161-168.

Konstantinos Kanistras, Kimon P. Valavanis, Matthew J. Rutherford, The history of circulation control, in: Foundations of Circulation Control Based Small-Scale
Unmanned Aircraft, Springer, Cham, 2018, pp. 19-25.

Sudhir Kumar Chaturvedi, Raj Sekhar, Saikat Banerjee, Hutanshu Kamal, Comparative review study of military and civilian unmanned aerial vehicles (uavs),
Incas Bull. 11 (3) (2019) 183-198.

Imad Jawhar, Nader Mohamed, Jameela Al-Jaroodi, Dharma P. Agrawal, Sheng Zhang, Communication and networking of UAV-based systems: classification
and associated architectures, J. Netw. Comput. Appl. 84 (2017) 93-108.

Baohua Shao, Mark S. Leeson, PaFiR: particle Filter Routing-A predictive relaying scheme for UAV-assisted oT communications in future innovated networks,
Internet Things (2019) 100077.

Asif Ali Laghari, M. Sulleman Memon, Agha Sheraz Pathan, RFID based toll deduction system, IJ Inform.n Technol. Comput. Sci. 4 (2012) 40-46.

Heda, Giriraj, Sayan Mandal, and S.N. Omkar. "Design, analysis and development of engine mount for a hybrid unmanned aerial vehicle."

Zhenyu Na, Jun Wang, Chungang Liu, Mingxiang Guan, Zihe Gao, Join trajectory optimization and communication design for UAV-enabled OFDM networks,
Ad. Hoc. Netw. 98 (2020) 102031.

Ali Arshad Nasir, Hoang Duong Tuan, Trung Q. Duong, H. Vincent Poor, UAV-enabled communication using NOMA, IEEE Trans. Commun. 67 (7) (2019)
5126-5138.

Yan Sun, Dongfang Xu, Derrick Wing Kwan Ng, Linglong Dai, Robert Schober, Optimal 3D-trajectory design and resource allocation for solar-powered UAV
communication systems, IEEE Trans. Commun. 67 (6) (2019) 4281-4298.

Nozhan Hosseini, Hosseinali Jamal, Jamal Haque, Thomas Magesacher, David W. Matolak, UAV command and control, navigation and surveillance: a review
of potential 5G and satellite systems, in: 2019 IEEE Aerospace Conference, IEEE, 2019, pp. 1-10.

Francisco Fabra, Willian Zamora, Julio Sangiiesa, Carlos T. Calafate, Juan-Carlos Cano, Pietro Manzoni, A distributed approach for collision avoidance between
multirotor UAVs following planned missions, Sensors 19 (10) (2019) 2404.

Mason Itkin, Mihui Kim, H. $0/1SOPS widel, UAV-Based Remote Sens. 1 (1) (2018) 191.

Haque Nawaz, Husnain Mansoor Ali, Asif Ali Laghari, UAV communication networks issues: a review, Arch. Comput. Meth. Eng. (2020) 1-21.

Robert Reid, Andrew Cann, Calum Meiklejohn, Liam Poli, Adrian Boeing, Thomas Braunl, Cooperative multi-robot navigation, exploration, mapping and object
detection with ROS, in: 2013 IEEE Intelligent Vehicles Symposium (IV), IEEE, 2013, pp. 1083-1088.

Mekonen H. Halefom, Tailoring an Airworthiness Document to Unmanned Aircraft Systems: A Case Study of MIL-HDBK-516C, Virginia Tech, 2020.

Jithin Jagannath, Anu Jagannath, Sean Furman, Tyler Gwin, Deep Learning and Reinforcement Learning For Autonomous Unmanned Aerial Systems: Roadmap
for Theory to Deployment, arXiv preprint, 2020.

Mustafa Demir, Nathan J. McNeese, Nancy J. Cooke, Team communication behaviors of the human-automation teaming, in: 2016 IEEE International Multi-
-Disciplinary Conference on Cognitive Methods in Situation Awareness and Decision Support (CogSIMA), IEEE, 2016, pp. 28-34.

M. Grasso, A. Renga, G. Fasano, M.D. Graziano, M. Grassi, A. Moccia, Design of an end-to-end demonstration mission of a Formation-Flying Synthetic Aperture
Radar (FF-SAR) based on microsatellites, Adv. Space Res. (2020).

Torsten Mack, Peter Kunz, Mechanically Steered and Horizontally Polarized Antenna For Aerial vehicles, and Associated Systems and Methods, U.S. Patent
Application, 2020 16/859filed September 17.

20


Page # 14
A.A. Laghari, A.K. Jumani, R.A. Laghari et al. Cognitive Robotics 3 (2023) 8-22

[40]
[41]

[42]
[43]
[44]
[45]
[46]
[47]
[48]
[49]
[50]

[51]
[52]

[53]
[54]

[55]
[56]
[57]
[58]
[59]
[60]
[61]
[62]
[63]

[64]
[65]

[66]

[67]

[68]
[69]
[70]
(71)
[72]
(73]
[74]
(75]
[76]
(77]
[78]

[79]
[80]

[81]

[82]

Huang Yao, Rongjun Qin, Xiaoyu Chen, Unmanned aerial vehicle for remote sensing applications—A review, Remote Sens. 11 (12) (2019) 1443.

Mochamad Mobed Bachtiar, Fernando Ardilla, Abdi Alghifara Felinanda, Android Application Design as Ground Control Station (GCS) and waypoint navigation
in Unmanned Aerial Vehicle (UAV), in: 2019 International Electronics Symposium (IES), IEEE, 2019, pp. 299-306.

Shuo Wan, Jiaxun Lu, Pingyi Fan, Khaled B. Letaief, Towards big data processing in iot: path planning and resource management of UAV base stations in
mobile-edge computing system, IEEE Internet Things J. (2019).

Norbert Haala, Michael Cramer, Florian Weimer, Martin Trittler, Performance test on UAV-based photogrammetric data collection, Int. Arch. Photogramm.
Remote Sens. Spat. Inf. Sci. 38 (6) (2011).

Muhammad Naveed, Sameer Qazi, QoE analysis of real-time video streaming over 4G-LTE for UAV-based surveillance applications, in: International Conference
on Intelligent Technologies and Applications, Singapore, Springer, 2019, pp. 443-458.

M. Raja, Gaurav Asthana, Ajay Singh, Ashna Singhal, Pallavi Lakra, Design of accurate navigation system by integrating INS and GPS modules, INCAS Bull. 11
(4) (2019) 139-154.

Victor Gonzélez-Jaramillo, Andreas Fries, Jérg Bendix, AGB estimation in a tropical mountain forest (TMF) by means of RGB and multispectral images using
an unmanned aerial vehicle (UAV), Remote Sens. 11 (12) (2019) 1413.

Eleftherios Lygouras, Antonios Gasteratos, Konstantinos tarchanidis, and athanasios mitropoulos. "ROLFER: a fully autonomous aerial rescue support system,
Microprocess. Microsyst. 61 (2018) 32-42.

Klaus Schneider-Zapp, Manuel Cubero-Castan, Dai Shi, Christoph Strecha, A new method to determine multi-angular reflectance factor from lightweight mul-
tispectral cameras with sky sensor in a target-less workflow applicable to UAV, Remote Sens. Environ. 229 (2019) 60-68.

Matthew Wallhead, Heping Zhu, John Sulik, William Stump, A workflow for extracting plot-level biophysical indicators from aerially acquired multispectral
imagery, Plant Health Prog. 18 (2) (2017) 95-96.

Tingting Chen, Weiguang Yang, Huajian Zhang, Bingyu Zhu, Ruier Zeng, Xinyue Wang, Shuaibin Wang, et al., Early detection of bacterial wilt in peanut plants
through leaf-level hyperspectral and unmanned aerial vehicle data, Comput. Electron. Agric. 177 (2020) 105708.

Paolo Tarolli, Simon M. Mudd, Remote Sensing of Geomorphology. Vol. 23, Elsevier, 2019.

Pablo Horstrand, Ratil Guerra, Aythami Rodriguez, Maria Diaz, Sebastidn Lépez, José Fco Lépez, A UAV platform based on a hyperspectral sensor for image
capturing and on-board processing, IEEE Access 7 (2019) 66919-66938.

Chuangi Xie, Ce Yang, A review on plant high-throughput phenotyping traits using UAV-based sensors, Comput. Electron. Agric. 178 (2020) 105731.

A.-.K. Mahlein, Matheus T. Kuska, Jan Behmann, Gerrit Polder, Achim Walter, Hyperspectral sensors and imaging technologies in phytopathology: state of the
art, Annu. Rev. Phytopathol. 56 (2018) 535-558.

Hamed Gholizadeh, John A. Gamon, Christopher J. Helzer, Jeannine Cavender-Bares, Multi-temporal assessment of grassland a-and f-diversity using hyper-
spectral imaging, Ecol. Appl. 30 (7) (2020) e02145.

Julia Kelly, Natascha Kljun, Per-Ola Olsson, Laura Mihai, Bengt Liljeblad, Per Weslien, Leif Klemedtsson, Lars Eklundh, Challenges and best practices for deriving
temperature data from an uncalibrated UAV thermal infrared camera, Remote Sens. 11 (5) (2019) 567.

Mehdi Khoshboresh Masouleh, Reza Shah-Hosseini, Development and evaluation of a deep learning model for real-time ground vehicle semantic segmentation
from UAV-based thermal infrared imagery, ISPRS J. Photogramm. Remote Sens. 155 (2019) 172-186.

E. Wardihani, Magfur Ramdhani, Amin Suharjono, Thomas Agung Setyawan, Sidiq Syamsul Hidayat, Sarono Widodo Helmy, Eddy Triyono, F. Saifullah,
Real-time forest fire monitoring system using unmanned aerial vehicle, J. Eng. Sci. Technol. 13 (6) (2018) 1587-1594.

Enas Ismail, Arcangelo Merla, Modeling thermal infrared imaging data for differential diagnosis, in: Application of Infrared to Biomedical Sciences, Springer,
Singapore, 2017, pp. 477-515.

Joyce, Michael. "Evaluating American marten habitat quality using airborne light detection and ranging (LiDAR) data." (2018).

Vanessa Sousa da Silva, Carlos Alberto Silva, Midhun Mohan, Adrian Cardil, Franciel Eduardo Rex, Gabrielle Hambrecht Loureiro, Danilo Roberti Alves
de Almeida, et al., Combined impact of sample size and modeling approaches for predicting stem volume in eucalyptus spp. forest plantations using field
and LiDAR data, Remote Sens. 12 (9) (2020) 1438.

Wenxuan Zheng, Honglun Wang, Hongxia Ji, Jianfa Wu, UAV formation flight and collision warning with centralized control of ground control station, in:
2019 IEEE International Conference on Unmanned Systems (ICUS), IEEE, 2019, pp. 103-108.

Santiago Martinez, Juan Ortiz, Ma Luz Gil, Ma Teresa Rego, Recording complex structures using close range photogrammetry: the cathedral of Santiago De
Compostela, Photogramm. Record 28 (144) (2013) 375-395.

Christopher S. Tang, Lucas P. Veelenturf, The strategic role of logistics in the industry 4.0 era, Transp. Res. Part E: Logist. Transp. Rev. 129 (2019) 1-11.
Thomas. Kirschstein, Comparison of energy demands of drone-based and ground-based parcel delivery services, Transp. Res.Part D: Transp. Environ. 78 (2020)
102209.

CLL. Kang, Y. Cheng, F. Wang, M.M. Zong, J. Luo, J.Y. Lei, The application of Uav oblique photogrammetry in smart tourism: a case study of Longji terraced
scenic SPOT in Guangxi Province, Int. Arch. Photogramm., Remote Sens. Spat. Inf. Sci. 42 (2020) 575-580.

L.LN. Jiayuan, Z.H.O.U. Xingxia, D.E.N.G. Shunjie, D.U. Xiaolin, W.A.N.G. Meimei, L.I. Xinjuan, Inspecting unattended irrigation canals of Dujiangyan in
mountainous area with UAV remote sensing technology, in: 2019 8th International Conference on Agro-Geoinformatics (Agro-Geoinformatics), IEEE, 2019,
pp. 1-5.

Hazel M. Taylor, Christian Dondrup, Katrin S. Lohan, Introducing a scalable and modular control framework for low-cost monocular robots in hazardous
environments, in: 2019 IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems (IROS), IEEE, 2019, pp. 6421-6426.

Hyewon Kim, Woojung Kim, Sang Don Kim, Damage assessment of rice crop after toluene exposure based on the vegetation index (VI) and UAV multispectral
imagery, Remote Sens. 13 (1) (2021) 25.

Mohammad Fatin Fatihur Rahman, Shurui Fan, Yan Zhang, Lei Chen, A comparative study on application of unmanned aerial vehicle systems in agriculture,
Agriculture 11 (1) (2021) 22.

Imran Charania, Xinrong Li, Smart farming: agriculture’s shift from a labor intensive to technology native industry, Internet Things 9 (2020) 100142.
Benjamin R. Jordan, Collecting field data in volcanic landscapes using small UAS (sUAS)/drones, J. Volcanol. Geotherm. Res. 385 (2019) 231-241.

S. Ahirwar, R. Swarnkar, S. Bhukya, G. Namwade, Application of drone in agriculture, Int. J. Curr. Microbiol. Appl. Sci. 8 (01) (2019) 2500-2505.

Kye Adams, Allison Broad, David Ruiz-Garcia, Andrew R. Davis, Continuous wildlife monitoring using blimps as an aerial platform: a case study observing
marine megafauna, Aust. Zool. 40 (3) (2020) 407-415.

Chai K. Toh, Julio A. Sanguesa, Juan C. Cano, Francisco J. Martinez, Advances in smart roads for future smart cities, Proc. R. Soc. A 476 (2233) (2020)
20190439.

Muhammad Ibrar, Jianing Mi, Shahid Karim, Asif Ali Laghari, Shakir Muhammad Shaikh, Vishal Kumar, Improvement of large-vehicle detection and monitoring
on CPEC route, 3D Res. 9 (3) (2018) 45.

Jessica R. Cauchard, Alex Tamkin, Cheng Yao Wang, Luke Vink, Michelle Park, Tommy Fang, James A. Landay, drone. io: a gestural and visual interface for
human-drone interaction, in: 2019 14th ACM/IEEE International Conference on Human-Robot Interaction (HRI), IEEE, 2019, pp. 153-162.

Maria De Marsico, Alessandro Spagnoli, Using hands as an easy UAV joystick for entertainment applications, in: Proceedings of the 13th Biannual Conference
of the Italian SIGCHI Chapter, Designing the next interaction, 2019, pp. 1-9.

https://www.statista.com/chart/17201 /commecial-drones-projected-growth/ [accessed on 1/6/2021]

Christian Ruf, Markus Zwick, Sten Morawietz, Peter Stuetz, in: Enhancing Automated Aerial Reconnaissance Onboard UAVs Using Sensor Data Processing-Char-
acteristics and Pareto Front Optimization, AIAA Scitech 2019 Forum, 2019, p. 1541.

Ivan Maza, Fernando Caballero, Jestis Capitan, José Ramiro Martinez-de-Dios, Anibal Ollero, Experimental results in multi-UAV coordination for disaster
management and civil security applications, J. Intell. Robot. Syst. 61 (1-4) (2011) 563-585.

Jun Li, Yifeng Zhou, Louise Lamont, Communication architectures and protocols for networking unmanned aerial vehicles, in: 2013 IEEE Globecom Workshops
(GC Wkshps), IEEE, 2013, pp. 1415-1420.

  

21


Page # 15
A.A. Laghari, A.K. Jumani, R.A. Laghari et al. Cognitive Robotics 3 (2023) 8-22

[83]
[84]

[85]
[86]

[87]
[88]

[89]
[90]
[91]
[92]
[93]
[94]

[95]

[96]
[97]
[98]
[99]
[100]
01)
[102]
[103]
[104]
[105]

[106]
[107]

[108]
[109]
[110]

11)
[112]

[113]
[114]
[115]
[116]
[117]
[118]

[119]

[120]

Muhammad Asghar Khan, Ijaz Mansoor Qureshi, Fahimullah Khanzada, A hybrid communication scheme for efficient and low-cost deployment of future flying
ad-hoc network (FANET), Drones 3 (1) (2019) 16.

Chaitanya Rani, Hamidreza Modares, Raghavendra Sriram, Dariusz Mikulski, Frank L. Lewis, Security of unmanned aerial vehicle systems against cyber-physical
attacks, J. Defense Model. Simul. 13 (3) (2016) 331-342.

Daojing He, Sammy Chan, Mohsen Guizani, Communication security of unmanned aerial vehicles, IEEE Wirel. Commun. 24 (4) (2016) 134-139.

Riddhi V. Karpe, Sukanya Kulkarni, Software defined radio based global positioning system jamming and spoofing for vulnerability analysis, in: 2020 Interna-
tional Conference on Electronics and Sustainable Communication Systems (ICESC), IEEE, 2020, pp. 881-888.

Bora Ly, Romny Ly, Cybersecurity in unmanned aerial vehicles (UAVs), J. Cyber Secur. Technol. (2020) 1-18.

Li Li, Kangye Qu, Kuo-Yi Lin, A survey on attack resilient of UAV motion planning, in: 2020 IEEE 16th International Conference on Control & Automation
(ICCA), IEEE, 2020, pp. 558-563.

Aakif Mairaj, Subhrajit Majumder, Ahmad Y. Javaid, Game theoretic strategies for an unmanned aerial vehicle network host under DDoS attack, in: 2019
International Conference on Unmanned Aircraft Systems (ICUAS), IEEE, 2019, pp. 120-128.

Panagiotis Vamvakas, Eirini Eleni Tsiropoulou, Symeon Papavassiliou, Exploiting prospect theory and risk-awareness to protect UAV-assisted network operation,
EURASIP J. Wirel. Commun. Netw. 2019 (1) (2019) 286.

Susheela Dahiya, Manik Garg, Unmanned aerial vehicles: vulnerability to cyber attacks, in: International Conference on Unmanned Aerial System in Geomatics,
Cham, Springer, 2019, pp. 201-211.

Tejasvi Alladi, Naren Naren, Gaurang Bansal, Vinay Chamola, Mohsen Guizani, SecAuthUAV: a novel authentication scheme for UAV-base station scenario,
IEEE Trans. Veh. Technol. (2020).

Gaurav Choudhary, Vishal Sharma, Ilsun You, Kangbin Yim, Ray Chen, Jin-Hee Cho, Intrusion detection systems for networked unmanned aerial vehicles: a
survey, in: 2018 14th International Wireless Communications & Mobile Computing Conference (IWCMC), IEEE, 2018, pp. 560-565.

Aditya Raj Singh, Harbhajan Singh, Abhineet Anand, Vulnerability assessment, risk, and challenges associated with automated vehicles based on artificial
intelligence, in: Advances in Communication and Computational Technology, Springer, Singapore, 2021, pp. 1323-1337.

Charan Gudla, Md Shohel Rana, Andrew H. Sung, Defense techniques against cyber attacks on unmanned aerial vehicles, in: Proceedings of the International
Conference on Embedded Systems, Cyber-physical Systems, and Applications (ESCS), The Steering Committee of The World Congress in Computer Science,
Computer Engineering and Applied Computing (WorldComp), 2018, pp. 110-116.

Sukhrob Atoev, Oh-Jun Kwon, Chee-Yong Kim, Suk-Hwan Lee, Young-Rak Choi, Ki-Ryong Kwon, The secure UAV communication link based on OTP encryption
technique, in: 2019 Eleventh International Conference on Ubiquitous and Future Networks (ICUFN), IEEE, 2019, pp. 1-3.

Jean-Philippe Condomines, Ruohao Zhang, Nicolas Larrieu, Network intrusion detection system for UAV ad-hoc communication: from methodology design to
real test validation, Ad. Hoc. Netw. 90 (2019) 101759.

Mahmoud Elfar, Haibei Zhu, Mary L. Cummings, Miroslav Pajic, Security-aware synthesis of human-UAV protocols, in: 2019 International Conference on
Robotics and Automation (ICRA), IEEE, 2019, pp. 8011-8017.

Md Zoheb Hassan, Md Jahangir Hossain, Julian Cheng, Victor CM Leung, Statistical-QoS guarantee for IoT network driven by laser-powered UAV relay and RF
backscatter communications, IEEE Trans. Green Commun. Netw. (2020).

Jingjing Yao, Nirwan Ansari, QoS-aware power control in internet of drones for data collection service, IEEE Trans. Veh. Technol. 68 (7) (2019) 6649-6656.
LV. Kovalev, A.A. Voroshilova, M.V. Karaseva, On the problem of the manned aircraft modification to UAVs, J. Phys.: Conf. Ser. 1399 (5) (2019) 055100.
Asif Ali Laghari, Hui He, Muhammad Shafiq, Asiya Khan, Application of quality of experience in networked services: review, trend & perspectives, Syst. Practice
Action Res. 32 (5) (2019) 501-519.

Hermes J. Loschi, Vania V. Estrela, D. Jude Hemanth, Sandro R. Fernandes, Yuzo Iano, Asif Ali Laghari, Asiya Khan, Hui He, Robert Sroufe, Communications
requirements, video streaming, communications links and networked UAVs, Imaging Sens. Unmanned Aircraft Syst. 2 (2020) 6.

Asif Ali Laghari, Hui He, Shahid Karim, Himat Ali Shah, Nabin Kumar Karn, Quality of Experience Assessment of Video Quality in Social Clouds, Wireless
Communications and Mobile Computing 2017, 2017.

Sajida Karim, Hui He, Asif Ali Laghari, Arif Hussain Magsi, Rashid Ali Laghari, in: Quality of Service (QoS): Measurements of Image Formats in Social Cloud
Computing, Multimedia Tools and Applications, 2020, pp. 1-26.

A. Laghari, A.I. Khan, H. Hui, Quality of Experience (QoE) and Quality of Service (QoS), UAV Systems, 2019.

Bouziane Brik, Adlen Ksentini, Maha Bouaziz, Federated learning for UAVs-enabled wireless networks: use cases, challenges, and open problems, IEEE Access
8 (2020) 53841-53849.

Fadi Al-Turjman, Hadi Zahmatkesh, Ibrhaim Al-Oqily, Reda Daboul, Optimized unmanned aerial vehicles deployment for static and mobile targets’ monitoring,
Comput. Commun. 149 (2020) 27-35.

Xiongzhe Han, J.Alex Thomasson, Tianyi Wang, Vaishali Swaminathan, Autonomous mobile ground control point improves accuracy of agricultural remote
sensing through collaboration with UAV, Inventions 5 (1) (2020) 12.

Mo Elsayed, Moataz Mohamed, The impact of airspace regulations on unmanned aerial vehicles in last-mile operation, Transp. Rese. Part D: Transp. Environ.
87 (2020) 102480.

System and Method of Collision Avoidance in Unmanned Aerial Vehicles, U.S. Patent Application, 2020 16/526,734, filed April 2.

Greg Baker, Tom Bridgwater, Paul Bremner, Manuel Giuliani, Towards an Immersive User Interface For Waypoint Navigation of a Mobile Robot, arXiv preprint,
2020.

E. Aldao, L.M. Gonzalez-de Santos, H. Gonzalez-Jorge, LiDAR based detect and avoid system for UAV navigation in UAM corridors, Drones 6 (8) (2022) Art.
no. 8Aug, doi:10.3390/drones6080185.

S. Blau, J. Sternberg, P. Weeden, F. Urzedo, R. Wright, C. Watson, Exploring non-invasive approaches to assist in the detection of clandestine human burials:
developing a way forward, Forensic Sci. Res. 3 (4) (2018) 320-342 Oct..

H. Nawaz, H.M. Ali, M.H. Mahar, Swarm of unmanned aerial vehicles communication using 802.11g and 802.11n, Int. J. Comp. Sci. Netw. Secur. 19 (4) (2019)
289-292.

X. Chen, J. Tang, S. Lao, Review of unmanned aerial vehicle swarm communication architectures and routing protocols, Appl. Sci. 10 (10) (2020) Art. no.
10Jan., doi:10.3390/app10103661.

Haque Nawaz, Husnain Mansoor Ali, Shafiq-ur-Rehman Massan, Applications of unmanned aerial vehicles: a review, 3C Tecnol. (2019) 85-105 vol. Special
IssueNov., doi:10.17993/3ctecno.2019.specialissue3.85-105.

Asif Ali Laghari, Kaishan Wu, Rashid Ali Laghari, Mureed Ali, Abdullah Ayub Khan, A review and state of art of Internet of Things (IoT), Arch. Comput. Meth.
Eng. (2021) 1-19.

Xiaowei Wang, Shoulin Yin, Muhammad Shafiq, Asif Ali Laghari, Shahid Karim, Omar Cheikhrouhou, Wajdi Alhakami, Habib Hamam, A New V-net Con-
volutional Neural Network Based On Four-Dimensional Hyperchaotic System For Medical Image Encryption, Security and Communication Networks, 2022
2022.

Asif Ali Laghari, Hui He, Asiya Khan, Rashid Ali Laghari, Shoulin Yin, Jiachi Wang, Crowdsourcing platform for QoE evaluation for cloud multimedia services,
Comput. Sci. Inf. Syst. (2022) 38 00.

22


