Progress in Aerospace Sciences 121 (2020) 100694

Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

Progress in Aerospace Sciences
journal homepage: http://www.elsevier.com/locate/paerosci

Configurations, flight mechanisms, and applications of unmanned aerial
systems: A review
S. Darvishpoor a, J. Roshanian a, A. Raissi b, M. Hassanalian c, *
a

Department of Aerospace Engineering, K.N. Toosi University of Technology, Tehran, Iran
Chief Technology Officer, Advanced Technologies-Renewables (AT-R), Melbourne, FL, 32903, USA
c
Department of Mechanical Engineering, New Mexico Tech, Socorro, NM, 87801, USA
b

A R T I C L E I N F O

A B S T R A C T

Keywords:
Applications
Classification
Configuration
Drones
Flight mechanisms
UAS

Unmanned Aerial Systems (UASs) have a variety of applications in our daily life that have attracted the attention
of many researchers around the world. There are a variety of innovations in the flight mechanisms that UASs are
applying for flight. There is also a significant interest in the development of new types of drones that can fly
autonomously in different locations, such as cities, marine, and space environments and perform various mis­
sions. This paper reviews the different configurations, flight mechanisms, and applications of UASs. First of all,
UASs are divided into four main categories, including Horizontal Takeoff and Landing (HTOL), Vertical Takeoff
and Landing (VTOL), Hybrid, and Bio-Based drones. Then each category is divided into some sub-categories in
order to have a coherent review. The characteristics, advantages and drawbacks of each category are discussed
elaborately. Moreover, a comprehensive study is carried out on the applications of UASs and their specifications.

1. Introduction
In 1860, balloons were used to take photos for remote sensing [1]. In
1903, Julius Neubranner [2] designed and implemented a
breast-mounted aerial camera to be carried by pigeons for photography.
Even though this method was faster than balloons, they were not always
reliable in following their flight paths [3]. Later by progress in aviation
industries, these methods were replaced by aircraft for aerial photog­
raphy. After launching the first satellites into orbit for military appli­
cations around 1960 and the development of more sensitive sensors and
high-resolution cameras, the demand for using satellites for aerial sur­
veillance increased [4]. Unmanned Aerial Systems (UASs) or drones that
have many applications in both military and civilian sectors are
attracting much attention. To this end, new unmanned vehicle concepts
for different environments are being developed [5–9]. Each of these
UASs exhibits certain advantages and disadvantages for deployment in
particular missions and applications.
UASs can be equipped with various sensors and cameras that enable
them to conduct both outdoor and indoor missions in very challenging
environments [10–14]. The applications of these autonomous systems
can be categorized based on the type of missions (military/civilian),
flight zones (outdoor/indoor), and environments (underwater/on the

water/ground/air/space) [5]. Drones have been used for search and
rescue missions, mailing and delivery, environmental protection, as well
as in missions undersea and planetary explorations [15–17].
Classifications of UASs are often carried out based on their weight
and dimensions. Holland [18], Arjomandi et al. [19], Weibel and
Hansman [20], and Hassanalian and Abdelkefi [5] have categorized the
drones based on their weight and size. Table 1 depicts different classes of
drones according to the methodology defined by Hassanalian and
Abdelkefi [5]. This classification covers a wide range of UASs from
Unmanned Aerial Vehicles (UAVs) to Smart Dust (SD). It should be noted
that on most of those classifications, no consideration has been given to
the configuration and scheme of unmanned aerial systems.
In 2018, Saeed et al. also proposed a method for classifying hybrid
UAVs [21]. The classification proposed by Saeed et al. is based on the
flight mechanism and scheme - considering only the hybrid-systems,
such as tilt-rotors, tilt-wing, and tail sitter concepts.
This paper illustrates a comprehensive view and development of
different types of UASs in recent years, focusing on the flight mecha­
nism. Moreover, flight dynamics, control, aerodynamics, structure, and
other UASs’ specifications are considered. At the end of each section, we
discuss each category’s advantages and disadvantages and their design
challenges. In the second part of the paper, the various drones’

* Corresponding author.
E-mail address: mostafa.hassanalian@nmt.edu (M. Hassanalian).
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.paerosci.2020.100694
Received 15 July 2020; Received in revised form 26 November 2020; Accepted 26 November 2020
Available online 11 February 2021
0376-0421/© 2020 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

S. Darvishpoor et al.

Progress in Aerospace Sciences 121 (2020) 100694

Similarly, VTOL aerial vehicles are classified into seven sub-categories;
mono-rotors, multirotors, Coanda-effect, Lighter Than Air (LTA), un­
manned helicopters, wing rotors, and cyclocopters. Mono-rotors can be
divided into five groups: ornicopters, Thrust Vectoring mono-rotors
(TV), Moving Mass Controlled (MMC), and ducted-fan mono-rotors.
Multirotors are the most popular drones that have different configura­
tions, including bi-rotors, tri-rotors, quadrotors, pentarotors, hexa­
copters, etc. Among multirotors, quadcopters can have different forms
that include fixed-rotors, tilt-rotors, moving mass controlled, and Dyson
fan configurations.
The third category is the hybrid aerial vehicles, which are the com­
bination of VTOL and HTOL UASs. These types of drones takeoff and
land vertically like VTOLs and have a horizontal cruise flight like
HTOLs. Hybrid UASs are divided into two major sub-categories, such as
tilt and non-tilt configurations. Generally, tilt UASs use a tilt mechanism
to transfer from VTOL to HTOL mode, and there are two main groups in
this sub-category, i.e., tilt-body and tilt-components. Tilt-body UASs can
be found in two types: tail-sitter and semi-tail sitter. Tilt-components
also have two major types: tilt-rotor and tilt-wing. Non-Tilt UASs are
classified into two groups: dual systems and rotary-wings. All of these
categories will be reviewed in detail in the next sections.
The bio-based category consists of two sub-categories, bio-inspired
and bio in the loop drones. The bio-inspired drones which mimic living
creatures like birds, insects, or aquatic animals can be classified into
flapping-wings and non-flapping-wings. In the bio in the loop concept,
live insects and birds are controlled and used as drones, and biomaterials are integrated into the drones’ structure. It should be noted
that there are some UASs that can belong to two or more categories; for
example, flapping-wing drones sometimes can be VTOL, but the classi­
fication which is introduced in this paper focuses on their main idea of
flight.
This overall classification scheme of UASs provides an insight into
the selection of an appropriate configuration for different types of mis­
sions and applications. The remainder of this review article has been
organized into the following sections: Horizontal Takeoff and Landing
UASs are presented in Section 2. In section 3, different types of Vertical
Takeoff and Landing UASs are shown. Hybrid and bio-based drones are
examined in sections 4 and 5, respectively. Applications and capabilities
of different UAS configurations are discussed in section 6. Finally,
conclusions are given in Section 7.

Table 1
Drones classification proposed by Hassanalian and Abdelkefi based on their
weight and size [5].
Class

Weight Range

Wing Span Range

UAV
UAVμ
MAV
NAV
PAV
SD

5–1500 kg
2–5 kg
50–2000 g
3–50 g
0.5–3 g
0.005–0.5 g

2–61 m
1–2 m
15–100 cm
2.5–15 cm
0.25–2.5 cm
1–2 mm

applications are studied with a focus on flight mechanisms. We also
review the requirements of different applications and flight mechanisms
(categories) that are currently being used for those missions. In the end,
we have tried to summarize the previous sections by suggesting a suit­
able configuration for each application. This review expects readers to
get a good view of different flight mechanisms of UASs and their ad­
vantages and disadvantages, and the latest progress. We also hope it
would help the designers make a good decision to choose or develop an
appropriate configuration for their desired application.
In this paper, a general categorization of UASs based on their con­
figurations is presented and critically reviewed. To this end, drones have
been divided into four main categories, including Horizontal Takeoff
and Landing (HTOL), Vertical Takeoff and Landing (VTOL), Hybrid, and
Bio-based drones. Each of these categories is divided into a number of
sub-categories in a coherent manner. Fig. 1 shows the organization of
the proposed classification.
HTOL UASs are divided into four sub-categories, that is fixed-wings,
morphing wings, Magnus effect UASs, and unmanned paragliders.

2. Horizontal takeoff and landing UASs
Generally, the HTOL unmanned aerial systems need a runway to take
off or require to travel a horizontal route to reach the necessary mini­
mum takeoff speed [5]. This requirement can be satisfied by utilizing
engines and rotors or by employing an initial external thrust, such as
catapult-launched UASs. Moreover, the landing maneuver for these
UASs is often done horizontally. Different types of HTOL UASs are dis­
cussed below.
2.1. Fixed-wing UASs
Fixed-wing classification is applied to classical UASs that use their
wings to generate lift. Fixed-wing drones can have different wing de­
signs and even more than one pair of wings depending on the mission
[22–24]. Moreover, fixed-wing drones can have different configurations
for the tail, in terms of count, placement, and shape, but the flight
mechanism is based on the production of the lift using lifting surfaces.
These differences in the configurations of the fixed-wing drones are
generally aimed at increasing their performance, maneuverability, and
payload capacity [5]. Fig. 2 depicts different configurations of the wings
used for fixed-wing UASs. Similarly, tails of fixed-wing drones have
varying structures for a multitude of applications, as shown in Fig. 3.
A fixed-wing UAS is typically composed of a wing, horizontal tail,
vertical tail, fuselage, and a motor to produce the required lift [5].

Fig. 1. Classification of UASs.
2

S. Darvishpoor et al.

Progress in Aerospace Sciences 121 (2020) 100694

Fig. 2. Fixed-wing UASs with different wing configurations [25,26].

2.1.1. Challenges and benefits
Among different types of drones, fixed-wings are the most developed
and easiest ones to design and fabricate. They are ideal solutions for a
wide range of operations, e.g., firefighting, search and rescue, coastline,
reconnaissance, delivery missions and monitoring, as well as security
surveillance and defense-related missions. Therefore, a wide variety of
fixed-wing drones have been developed by different organizations and
researchers across the world. The fixed-wing UASs have several ad­
vantages, such as the low operating cost, the ability to operate under
adverse or hazardous conditions, and the increased flight endurance,
which is one of the most important characteristics for the missions above
[5,35]. Generally, fixed-wing UASs have longer endurance, which is
only limited by the available fuel on-board. The flight endurance of
fixed-wings is essentially up to the efficiency of the configuration. By
enhancing the performance specifications (maximum speed, stall speed,
rate of climb, turning radius, etc.), fixed-wing UAVs’ versatility and
potential can be further expanded [35].
While large fixed-wing UASs may have good performance in high
altitudes and speeds, the smaller classes of fixed-wing drones like MAVs
may face many challenges because of their lower speed and flight alti­
tudes. These challenges are due to their dynamic flight environment and
operational constraints, including flight at low Reynolds number, typi­
cally on the order of 104, which is lower than the majority of manned
aircraft. Lower Reynolds number flow exhibits increased viscous effects,
which result in higher drag penalties and reduced lift-to-drag ratio.
Another constraint is that MAVs flights frequently occur in relatively

Fig. 3. Fixed-wing UASs with different tail designs [27].

Generally, on the wing and tail of fixed-wing aerial vehicles, the flight
control surfaces are attached, which control the airflow and conse­
quently lifting force. Applying three control surfaces on the wings,
horizontal tail, and vertical tail, it becomes possible to control the UASs
rotation along the roll, pitch, and yaw axes. In Fig. 4, types of control
surfaces employed on fixed-wing drones are shown [28].
Fixed Wing UASs are very simple structurally and able to use
different propulsion systems, such as fuel engines, solar and batterypowered electric motors [29,30]. These types of aerial vehicles can be
designed in different sizes and classes, like Unmanned Air Vehicle
(UAV), Micro Air Vehicle (MAV), and Nano Air Vehicle (NAV) [5].
Fixed-wing UASs can fly over a wide range of altitudes and distances.
Despite all these benefits, they need a runway for taking off and landing,
and unlike VTOLs, they usually cannot perform a hovering flight
because of their low thrust to weight ratio. Moreover, the way of hov­
ering flight in fixed-wing UASs may not be so applicable due to the high
pitch angle. Even with these shortcomings, fixed-wing UASs are the most
widely used drones, and several thousand of them have been built and
flown around the world. For example, in China alone, around 1650,
different models of fixed-wing UASs have been developed [31]. Fig. 5
depicts several examples of fixed-wing drones having different
configurations.

Fig. 4. Control surfaces of a typical fixed-wing UAS [28].
3

S. Darvishpoor et al.

Progress in Aerospace Sciences 121 (2020) 100694

Fig. 5. Some different types of fixed-wing UASs [31–34].

unsteady flow conditions, where the flow fields are rapidly changing in
time and space, which induces rapid changes in the forces and moments
generated by the lifting surfaces [36].
Typically fixed-wing MAVs operate in low altitudes, where there are
high levels of turbulence. These turbulent disturbances produce random
roll and pitch inputs, severely disrupting MAVs’ flight and making their
control more challenging than manned fixed-wing aircraft or HALE
UASs [36]. Fig. 6 illustrates a typical MAV mission and the environ­
mental disturbances that affect the drone’s flight.
The fixed-wing MAVs are also so sensitive to the wind direction and
speed. Some studies show that they may fail to track the desired way­
point in the presence of a steady wind with a low critical speed (as low as
6 m/s) [37]. These drones have different flight speed, altitude, and
endurance, depending on their defined mission. But compared with
other types, such as multirotors or flapping-wings, they require rela­
tively higher speeds for flight (for MAVs, it may vary from 6 to 20 m/s).
Fixed-wing MAVs cannot fly slowly, and they do not hover due to a low

thrust to weight ratio, which makes them unable to perform indoor
missions. But for outdoor missions and where there is a need for high
speeds, they are one of the best choices. Fixed-wing drones usually
require a thrust loading of less than one and need less power to fly than a
helicopter or multirotor with the same weight in hovering mode. Since
the wing provides the required lift force that is highly dependent on the
airflow speed, the thrust should be great enough to reach the required
speed, but in multirotors or helicopters, the whole required lift should be
produced by the rotor(s) [5].
2.1.2. Joined-wing UASs
Joined-wings have shown their superior performance in terms of
aerodynamic efficiency and emissions reductions. Because of these ad­
vantages, joint wings have been utilized in UASs; for example, at Boeing,
researchers have developed a joined-wing UAV and tested it in a wind
tunnel (see Fig. 7(a)) [38]. There are also various versions of UAVs that
are using box-wings or joined-wings combined with tilt-rotors, tilt-wing,

Fig. 6. View of a typical MAV mission [36].
4

S. Darvishpoor et al.

Progress in Aerospace Sciences 121 (2020) 100694

Fig. 7. (a) Wind tunnel model of Boing’s joined-wing UAV [38] and (b) joined-wing UAV designed by Zafirov and Panayotov [43].

of the morphing wings [51]. They discussed the most notable examples
of morphing wing concepts with their corresponding applications to two
and three-dimensional wing models. This study also reviewed the
commonly used methods and tools for the design and analysis of the
morphing-wing UAVs, including structural and aerodynamic analyses
and aspects related to control and optimization [51].

and ducted fans (see Fig. 7(b)) [39–44]. In the 2016 seminal review of
the joined-wings UAVs by Cavallaro and Demasi, a particular focus was
placed on the activities conducted in the United States on the
joined-wing SensorCraft, PrandtlPlane, Strut- and Truss- Braced Wings,
and Box Wings [45].
2.1.2.1. Challenges and benefits. Joined wings, based on their shape and
design, may have better performance than traditional fixed-wings. For
example, some researchers have shown that box wings produce less drag
while having more complex structures than a conventional wing [45].
The general concept behind joined wings is to add an interconnected
wing to form a complex over-constrained system, with a substantial
increase of the design space and allowing more options in terms of
aerodynamics, flight mechanics, engine integration, aeroelasticity, etc.
It is not easy to consider a general advantage or disadvantage for all
joined-wing UASs as their characteristics are highly dependent on their
geometry. Besides their benefits, they may have challenges in terms of
aerodynamic and structural nonlinearities. Emphasizing the importance
of taking into account shocks and flow separations into aeroelastic an­
alyses, and the significance of material and control surfaces’ freeplay
nonlinearities remained to be concerned [45].

2.2.1. Challenges and benefits
Generally, fixed-wing UASs can fly at different flight conditions with
corresponding requirements. They have different flight phases, such as
take-off, landing, loiter or cruise flight [51]. The main idea of having a
morphing structure for a fixed-wing UAS is to change the shape during
the flight to obtain better performances in drag reduction, fuel con­
sumption, endurance and flight range. Even though morphing UASs can
decrease the cost and complexity of maintenance for different mission
objectives and flight conditions, they have complexities in their
morphing mechanisms, aerodynamic analysis and control. Despite these
challenges, the above-mentioned benefits of morphing wings make them
one of the best solutions for developing general-purpose UASs [51].
2.3. Magnus-effect UASs
Magnus-effect UASs employ an aerodynamic phenomenon called the
Mangus-effect. The effect of Magnus leads to production of lift force by a
rotating cylinder or the sphere that lies on the flow of air or is moving in
a fluid. The German physicist, Heinrich Gustav Magnus was the first
person that studied this effect and employed it as a control mechanism in
the ships [52]. It should be noted that most of the existing Magnus UASs
have a fuselage and tails like conventional fixed-wing drones, and they
have a propeller in front. The only difference is in the shape and struc­
ture of their wing. The Magnus force’s magnitude is much greater than
the lifting force of the wing with the same projected area and dynamic
air pressure. However, the Magnus effect as a flight mechanism has some
challenges, which will be reviewed later in this paper. Fig. 11 shows a
view of a fixed-wing UAV with a Mangus-effect design.
In general, Magnus wings are made of a simple cylinder or a cylinder
covered with blades. Aerodynamic calculations of Magnus wing imply
that a cylinder having a rough surface is more efficient than one having a
smooth -surface [52]. Typically, the Magnus force consists of a lift force
perpendicular to the airflow and drag, which is parallel to the direction
of airflow. In this configuration, friction between the rotational surface
and the surrounding airflow causes a moment, which must be neutral­
ized by a mechanical system. On the other hand, the rotation of the
cylinder causes the gyroscopic forces that should be considered in the
context of flight control and stability [52]. The lift produced by Magnus
wings or Magnus rotors depends on the wing’s spinning rate, airflow
speed, and body geometry. Unlike fixed-wing UASs, in Magnus effect
drones, the aerodynamic forces are independent of the angle of attack,
but they are highly dependent on the wings’ rotational speed. The ratio
between the rotor’s circumferential speed and the free stream velocity
has the main influence on a Magnus rotor’s aerodynamic efficiency.

2.2. Morphing-wing UASs
The Morphing-wing UASs use a similar flight mechanism to the fixedwings, except that depending on the flying regime or other conditions,
their wings can change to a different form [46,47]. This change can
occur in the wings’ specifications, such as the sweep-back or
sweep-forward angle or in a more general way, like changing the airfoil
shape or increase and decrease in the chord and wingspan. Fig. 8 depicts
an example of a wing with a variable-sweep angle [48].
Understanding the aerodynamics and flight dynamics of the wingdeformation of UASs is challenging. Fig. 9, a view of a morphing-wing
UAS with folding wings, is shown [49].
A different version of the morphing wing was developed by Ifju et al.,
in 2002, which uses a fixed, flexible wing concept (see Fig. 10) [50]. Li
et al., in 2018, reviewed the literature related to modeling and analysis

Fig. 8. Fixed-wing with a variable-sweep angle [48].
5

S. Darvishpoor et al.

Progress in Aerospace Sciences 121 (2020) 100694

Fig. 9. NASA’s morphing-wing UAV- dydren I2000 [49].

Fig. 12. Lift generated by a rotating cylinder [52].

will be constant because of autorotation; therefore, the lift force cannot
be controlled independently from the airspeed. In comparison to other
types of fixed-wing drones, the design of the Magnus-effect UAV is more
challenging due to the dependence of lift on the direction and speed of
airflow and the difficulties with regard to their control and aero­
dynamics. Moreover, the flow around a circular cylinder in
Mangus-effect UASs is complex and consists of tip vortices, and an
alternate vortex shedding between the rotor ends [52].
In 2010, Badalamenti conducted a detailed study of the Magnuseffect UAVs. In addition to building a Magnus-effect UAV, he also pro­
posed several alternative design concepts (see Fig. 13) [53]. In 2012,
Seifert derived the flight dynamics and aerodynamic modeling of this
type of UASs [52]. In 2013, Jiwei et al. patented a new concept, which
combined a fixed-wing UAV and Magnus-effect wing [54]. Later, Hou
et al. developed a Magnus-effect UAS in combination with a ducted-fan,
as shown in Fig. 14 [55]. Fig. 15 shows several examples of
Magnus-effect UASs. The rotatable cylinder can also be integrated into
the leading edge of conventional wings to generate a higher lift. In
Fig. 15(c), a view of this concept introduced by Gligorin and Romer is
shown [52].
There are also other concepts of Magnus UASs, including noncylinder wings, multiple parallel and non-parallel wings, combined
Magnus wing and conventional wings, lighter than air wind turbines and
so on, which have been reviewed by Seifert [52].

Fig. 10. The morphing wing MAV developed by Ifju et al. [50].

Fig. 11. Magnus-effect UAV with cylindrical wings [52].

Moreover, the sideslip angle and wing’s surface roughness may also
affect the performance of the Magnus wing. A typical Magnus rotor is
usable as long as it is spinning [52]. Fig. 12 depicts the lift generated by
the movement of a rotating cylinder [52].
Magnus-effect UASs are generally controlled like a fixed-wing UASs;
however, the effects of control surfaces will not be like that of fixedwings and will be more similar to the helicopter control system [52].
In this type of UAS, in the case of engine failure, the aerial vehicle may
continue flying for a short period of time due to the wing’s self-rotating
phenomenon, which happens in specific types of Magnus wings. In this
scenario, the velocity ratio between airspeed and circumferential speed

2.3.1. Challenges and benefits
As noted above, the significant advantages of a Magnus-effect UASs
are high-lift force or relatively high wing-loading and stall resistance in
some specific types of Magnus wings [52]. But using Magnus wings and
rotors needs additional control mechanisms, which may increase the
weight and complexity compared to a conventional wing. In lower
6

S. Darvishpoor et al.

Progress in Aerospace Sciences 121 (2020) 100694

Fig. 13. Conceptual designs of the Magnus-effect UAVs proposed by Badalamenti [53].

low Reynolds number and low-velocity ratios, we may have a negative
side force called negative Magnus force, which depends on the surface
roughness. In the design of a Magnus UAS, the negative Magnus force
can be an issue due to the break down of the lift force in specific ranges
of low Reynold number and velocity ratio [52]. This is a stall-like phe­
nomenon in Magnus UASs, while unlike the fixed-wing drones, the stall
is independent of angle of attack, but it may happen in a critical range of
Reynolds number and velocity ratio. The negative Magnus force is an
important issue, especially in MAVs, because of their low Reynolds
numbers [52]. When it comes to power and energy consumption, the
overall efficiency of a Magnus UASs will probably always be lower than
a fixed-wing. Moreover, the high lift force will only be useful if the
Magnus rotor’s weight and its control mechanism can come close to that
of an equal-sized wing [52].
2.4. Paraglider UASs
Unmanned paragliders are usually constructed in a manner similar to
the manned versions. In these UASs, the parachute generates lift like a
wing. In paragliders, a motor usually with a fixed-pitch propeller is
placed in a body that is attached to the parachute with suspension ropes
(see Fig. 16(a)) [58]. These cost-effective UASs can be used for trans­
porting heavy cargo and usually have a long-endurance. Moreover, in
addition to high stability, they have high robustness againstdis­
turbances. However, this type of aerial vehicle’s mathematical modeling
is difficult due to swing motion caused by the separation between the
parachute’s center of gravity (CG) and that of the cargo’s CG.
The thrust generated by the propeller has a significant effect on the
pitch angle. In paragliders, the ropes’ flexibility leads to the motion in
the yaw and pitch axes, and since the parachute is full of air, any change
in the airflow speed and shape of the wing affects their flight [58]. The
control mechanism for these UASs is accomplished using ropes attached
to the parachute. These ropes change the direction of airflow over the
parachute by way of turning it. As a result, the lift and drag forces
generated by the parachute change, and the paraglider moves in the
desired direction. Li et al. in 2019, investigated the design, modeling,
control, and testing of an unmanned paraglider, as shown in Fig. 16(b)
[58].

Fig. 14. View of Magnus-effect UAS in combination with a ducted-fan pro­
posed by Hou et al. [55].

airspeed, particularly during takeoff and landing, Mangus rotors are
typically spinning at high rates, which eventually influences UAS’s
lateral motion by precession and nutation gyroscopic effects. The gy­
roscopic effects may help to increase stability but makes major issues in
control. In Magnus rotors, the nutation gyroscopic effects might be
observed as tumbling, as the yaw and roll angles are expected to oscillate
simultaneously.
The design and development of a proper flight control system to
handle the gyroscopic forces for future Magnus-effect UASs is essential.
Moreover, there is a need for other control surface mechanisms to
control the roll in this type of drone. A potential solution for controlling
the UAS in the roll axis is to turn the Magnus rotors at different speeds,
but in cases where this is not possible, some extra control surfaces should
be considered instead of the removed ailerons [52].
It should be noted that for Mangus-effects UASs, there is not enough
information for their design, aerodynamic modeling and flight dynamics
fundamentals [52].
Even though a Magnus rotor is a lifting device, in a specific range of

2.4.1. Challenges and benefits
Paraglider UASs have an appropriate configuration for heavy trans­
portation and long-distance delivery missions because of their low cost,
compact structure, inherent stability, and adaptability to different en­
vironments (the additional mass of the parafoil canopy exists) [58].
These drones are mainly flying at a low speed and in an environment

Fig. 15. Examples of Magnus-effect UASs (a) four Magnus wing with the rough surface [56], (b) four Magnus wing with blades [57], and (c) Gligorin’s concept of
combined fixed-wing and Magnus rotor [52].
7

S. Darvishpoor et al.

Progress in Aerospace Sciences 121 (2020) 100694

Fig. 16. (a) Structure of an unmanned paraglider and (b) paraglider made by Li et al. [58].

with high uncertainty, where the disturbance’s magnitude is close to
their flight speed, which affects their flight efficiency. Moreover, due to
the nonlinear and time-varying dynamic characteristics and high
coupling degree, the only input controls are the control rope and the
propeller thrust. In these UASs, the control inputs’ dimensions are
smaller than outputs, which makes the control algorithms more stable,
reliable, and adaptive [59]. Paraglider UASs have plenty of applications
in surveillance and reconnaissance missions. They also have been used
for contaminated gas sampling in environmental pollution and volcanic
eruption [60].

external forces such as wind. To mitigate these problems, Holten, in
2002, proposed a design that employed only one rotor to fly without any
tail-fan or tail-rotor [61]. In this UAS, the blades oscillate vertically and
in circular motions in addition to rotational spin. Hence, besides the lift,
they also produce a drag force, where it can be manipulated to control
the UAV and to eliminate the effect of reaction torque. Fig. 17 depicts
the aerodynamic forces of an ornicopter, which is similar to an airfoil
with an oscillating trajectory. In the ornicopters, a strong downward
flapping motion leads to a forward tilt of the lift vector that creates
propulsion, and the upward flapping has the opposite effect [61].
The transitional motion of the ornicopters causes some disturbances
in the flight. Various ideas have been advanced to address this problem,
including the use of a pair of additional blades (four blades), three
blades, and asymmetric blades [62]. In these UASs, just like the heli­
copters, swash-plate is responsible for generating periodic and conven­
tional controls. The rotation of the swash-plate turns the plane of the
blades asymmetrically towards the main axis. As a result, the change in
the flapping angle will not produce a force on the horizontal plane. This
makes the lateral control and periodic control to become independent of
each other [62]. Fig. 18(a) and (b) depict, respectively, examples of an
ornicopter having asymmetric blades and a swash-plate mechanism.
In 2002, Holten derived the aerodynamics and dynamic modeling of
an ornicopter UAS [61]. Heiligers et al. in 2005, designed and manu­
factured a radio-controlled ornicopter with no reaction torque [63].
Wan and Pavel in 2014, described the basic principles of the ornicopter’s
forced flapping and feasibility of the ornicopter concept with respect to
the required power, stability, performance, and oscillatory loads [62].

3. Vertical takeoff and landing UASs
Generally, the Vertical Takeoff and Landing (VTOL) UASs do not
need a runway for takeoff and landing. These types of UAVs employ
their propulsion systems for vertical takeoff and landing and hovering
flight [5]. In the following, different VTOL types are discussed.
3.1. Mono-rotors
The control of mono-rotor UASs and the suppression of gyroscopic
and reaction torque of the rotor is challenging because of using only one
rotor. Therefore, numerous solutions have been proposed to overcome
these problems, which eventually led to the invention of different types
of VTOL UASs. This category of UASs is divided into four sub-categories
as follows: ornicopters (semi-flapping wing), thrust vectoring, moving
mass controlled, and ducted-fan. There are also some unconventional
mono-rotors which are studied in following sections.

3.1.1.1. Challenges and benefits. Tail-rotor in helicopters is an essential
part to cancel out the reaction torque of the main rotor. This rotor also
can enhance helicopter maneuverability. However, it has many draw­
backs, such as high power consumption and marginal control authority
under unfavorable wind conditions. Moreover, it is noisy, vulnerable
and dangerous. Researches indicate that about half of the helicopters’
accidents are related to their tail rotor’s failure [62]. Ornicopters are
types of helicopters without reaction torque, where this eliminates the
need for a tail rotor. Ornicopters also have some disadvantages,
including a small flight envelope and worse stability and handling
qualities in yaw direction than helicopters [64].

3.1.1. Ornicopters
This class of UASs has semi-flapping wings or cyclic blades. Orni­
copters are tail-less helicopters that can fly as a result of the periodic
oscillation of their blades. The tail in a helicopter consumes much en­
ergy. Helicopters are noisy and offer limited control capability against

3.1.2. Thrust vectoring
This group of UASs often are made of a brushless motor, which is
simultaneously able to produce clockwise (CW) and counter-clockwise
(CCW) rotation (Contra rotating motors). Two CW and CCW blades
are used in this type of UASs to produce the required lift while do not
generate any gyroscopic and reaction torque. In thrust vectoring drones,

Fig. 17. Cyclic motion of blades in ornicopters and aerodynamic forces [61].
8

S. Darvishpoor et al.

Progress in Aerospace Sciences 121 (2020) 100694

Fig. 18. An ornicopter with (a) asymmetric blades, and (b) swash-plate mechanism [62].

the motor is often mounted on a servo motor actuator, which can tilt it in
different directions. The change in the thrust vector enables the longi­
tudinal and lateral motion, and by changing the speed of the rotors, it is
possible to have a motion in the yaw axis. It is also possible to use swashplate instead of servo mechanism to buid coaxial helicopters.
Considering the absence of the reaction torque and using the thrust
vectoring control mechanism, these UASs have very simple mathemat­
ical model, wherein hovering conditions, they can be easily considered
as a mass and a force. It should be noted that the aerodynamic study of
the two coaxial blades is a challenging issue because of the interference
of airflow passing through their surface. Giorgi et al. in 2017, conducted
a numerical study on the performance of contra-rotating propellers for
an unmanned aerial vehicle [65]. This type of UASs is simpler than other
single-rotor drones. Their control is easier, and considering the empty
space under these drones, they are suitable to carry payloads. However,
if one of the blades or propellers is lost, it is impossible to control them.
So, they have a lower security margin. Few examples of this kind of
drone have been designed and made, such as Bombardier OL327, EADS
Dornier SEAMOS (and GEAMOS) [66], and Kamov KA-137 [67]. In
Fig. 19, views of thrust vectoring UASs are shown.

3.1.3. Moving mass controlled
This group of drones is similar to Thrust Vectoring UASs, but the
method used in these UASs for changing the vector of thrust is based on
the displacement of the center of gravity. In this type of drone, there are
one or more moving masses that are controlling the CG of the UAS [72].
One of the main challenges of these configurations is the nonlinearity of
the system that happens due to the changes in the moment of inertia. In
the past, moving mass mechanisms have been used widely in sub­
marines, underwater vehicles, rotating projectiles, satellites, spacecraft,
and balloons [73], but they are recently applied in multirotor drones
[74].
In this type of UAS, the moving mass mechanisms which are used to
move the center of mass can be designed in a variety of shapes, such as
the pulley, rails, gear, etc. The motion in the yaw axis is generated by
velocity difference in the blades, but other motions are based on shifting
the center of gravity. In moving mass controlled UAS, the thrust vector is
often constant except in yaw maneuver. With moving the CG along the
lateral axis, the thrust vector will create a torque around the longitudinal
axis, and by moving the CG along the longitudinal axis, a torque will be
created around the lateral axis, which eventually will result in roll and
pitch motions [75–80]. It should be noted that this type of drone does
not have the complexity of the UASs with more blades or swash-plate.
However, the nonlinear coupling of the equations and the variability
of the matrix of the moment of inertia and the CG with respect to the
time make the modeling more complicated.
In 2008, Bermes et al. proposed a new design of the steering mech­
anism for a mini coaxial helicopter and studied the dynamics of this UAS
[77]. Schafroth et al. in 2008, studied the stability of this type of drone
[78]. Bermes and Sartori, in 2008, discussed the control mechanism of a
coaxial helicopter with the center of gravity steering [79]. In Fig. 20(a)
and (b), views of the moving mass controlled mono-rotor and its
mechanism are shown, respectively.

3.1.2.1. Challenges and benefits. Coaxial mono-rotors are an attractive
UAS platform due to their small dimension, aerodynamic symmetry, and
high thrust-to-weight ratio. For a similar weight, a coaxial mono-rotor’s
size can be 35–40% smaller than a helicopter. The coaxial mono-rotors
can easily cancel out the yaw moment and side forces commonly seen in
helicopters. These drones also do not require extra mechanisms to
eliminate reaction torque, as seen in Ornicopters. Thus, the mono-rotors
are much more effective in fast forward flights. These advantages make
them an ideal configuration for operation in confined environments,
such as indoor and cluttered outdoor [70]. Another feature of a coaxial
helicopter is using a stabilizer bar, which attaches to the top rotor hub,
and passively stabilizes the UAS. However, it strongly influences the
rotor dynamics, especially the fixed-pitch coaxial configuration, as the
upper rotor is not linked to any servo. As a result, the upper rotor’s cyclic
pitch control is solely induced by the stabilizer bar [71].

3.1.3.1. Challenges and benefits. One of the main objectives of designing
mono-rotors is to have a small size drone. Because of using only one
rotor, this configuration is more suitable to reduce the size of the drones.

Fig. 19. Views of (a) contra-rotating brushless motor and its blades, (b) a thrust vectoring mono-rotor with a camera mounted on [68], (c) EADS Dornier SEAMOS
mono-rotor [67], and (d) Skybotix’s CoaX autonomous commercial micro-helicopter [69].
9

S. Darvishpoor et al.

Progress in Aerospace Sciences 121 (2020) 100694

Fig. 20. Views of (a) a moving mass controlled mono-rotor designed by Bermes et al. [77] and (b) moving mass mechanism in a mono-rotor [80].

Although the swash-plate is a reliable mechanism for mono-rotors, it
would need very small mechanical parts in smaller drones, and it is
much more complicated than moving mass controlled mechanisms.
Generally, moving mass controlled mono-rotors have a reliable and easy
to control mechanism while consuming much more energy [81]. This
type of mono-rotors may provide high maneuverability, while their
dynamic is more complicated. In these UASs, shifting the center of
gravity will increase the coupling between the flight axes (pitch, roll,
and yaw) by creating non-diagonal terms in the moment of the inertia
matrix (I). Moreover, in the cases where the moving masses’ velocities
are high, the terms of linear and/or rotational accelerations of the
moving masses may not be neglectable [82].

obtained by reversing this process. If only one fan is used in these drones,
an initial installation angle should be taken for the angle of all the fins so
that the airflow rotates in the opposite direction of the torque generated
by the propellers [83]. The efficiency of the propeller in this type of
drone can be improved by applying a duct. Moreover, a smaller pro­
peller will be needed to generate thrust force compared to a duct-free
drone. In these drones, also the duct can be designed for having a
higher efficiency at higher speeds. Generally, these UASs have less noise
compared to other types and can be used in hybrid drones, such as
tilt-rotor UASs. However, along with all of these benefits, the ducted-fan
UASs have more complex aerodynamics than duct-free propellers. In
these drones, to achieve high efficiency, the distance between propeller
and duct should be very short, and they need a motor with a greater
revolution. Furthermore, at a high angle of attack, stall may happen for
some parts of the duct that consequently will generate more aero­
dynamic drag.
In Fig. 22(a), the ducted-fan VTOL UAS developed by AD&D Hornet
is shown [84]. In 2006, Eriksson designed, analyzed, and tested a
ducted-fan UAV. In this work, the performance of the designed
ducted-fan UAS was determined by the lift capacity, the position accu­
racy, and wind tolerance [83]. Moreover, a commercialized ducted-fan
drone (T-Hawk) has been designed by Honeywell and the US Defense
Advanced Research Agency (DARPA) (see Fig. 22(b)). Finmeccanica
Selex ES also designed and manufactured a ducted-fan UAS for target
acquisition and over-the-hill surveillance, as shown in Fig. 22(c) [85].

3.1.4. Ducted-fan UASs
This class of drones consists of a duct with a fan (or propeller) that
controls the vehicle using control surfaces embedded at the end of the
duct [5]. This type of drone can also be categorized as tail-sitters;
however, they are classified in this category since their flight relies on
their propellers only, and they do not use wings or canards. The thrust
required for these drones is provided by a fan or propeller and some­
times by a coaxial fan or propeller. Several fins are incorporated into the
fan outlet that drives the vehicle by guiding the airflow. Landing and
takeoff maneuvers are possible with an increase or decrease in fan or
propeller speed. Following the differential rotation of two or all four fins
equally, the air will circulate like a vortex and cause a yaw motion.
As can be seen in Fig. 21, if the two fins in the y-axis remain at 0◦ , a
roll motion can be created following the simultaneous movement of the
two fins in the x-axis direction. Similarly, pitch movement can be

3.1.4.1. Challenges and benefits. In ducted-fan UASs, the presence of
duct reduces the lift losses initiated from the tip leakage flow. It also can
control the flow speed and pressure distribution in the rotor section.
Moreover, it can provide protection for high-speed rotating blades,
higher propulsive efficiency, and low aero-acoustic emissions [87].
Generally, UASs with ducted-fan structures can generate more thrust
than a duct-free rotor with the same blade size. These ducted-fan rotors’
characteristics will provide a compact body design for UAS with strong
mobility and high efficiency [88]. Ducted-fan UASs, due to their
configuration, can perform missions in confined, hazardous, and clut­
tered environments. However, these UASs have complex aerodynamic
structures compared to other types of aerial vehicles [89]. For
ducted-fan UASs flying in turbulent and crosswinds conditions, a duct
stabilizing torque will be generated due to the lateral momentum drag.
This torque will resist tipping into the wind and strongly affects the
flight envelope of UAS. A small leading-edge radius in ducted-fan UASs
would cause a flow separation, which affects drone performance in static
or crosswind orientations. This phenomenon during the hovering flight
mode would also reduce the drone’s static performance by decreasing
the lift produced by the duct, which will consequently increase the
required power [87].
3.1.5. Unconventional concepts
Some kinds of mono-rotors UASs are known as All Rotating Aircraft,
consisting of a rotor and a structure with flaps to reduce the tendency of
spinning over itself due to the propeller momentum preservation. In this
concept, all of the body rotates with the rotor, and there is no effort to

Fig. 21. Structure of a ducted-fan VTOL mono-rotor [83].
10

S. Darvishpoor et al.

Progress in Aerospace Sciences 121 (2020) 100694

Fig. 22. Views of ducted-fan developed by (a) AD&D Hornet [84], (b) Honeywell [86], and (c) Finmeccanica Selex ES [85].

Fig. 23. Views of unconventional mono-rotors (a) all rotating mono-rotor developed by Toledo et al. [90] (b) coaxial mono-rotor with Magnus rotors for attitude
control [81], and (c) coaxial mono-rotor with three rotors for attitude control [81].

3.2.1. Bi-rotors
Bi-rotors drones are composed of two motors, which rotate in
opposite directions to neutralize each other’s reaction torque [5]. The
basis of motion inthis category of drones is thrust vectoring. Each rotor
and its blade are deployed on a servo motor that tilts it around the lateral
axis; therefore, they can be categorized as tilt-rotor drones too. In this
type of UAS, the yaw can be obtained similar to mono-rotors by creating
difference between the two rotors speed. In this case, the yaw and roll
motions are coupled. Another way is to rotate the motors equally but in
the opposite direction; in this case, only the yaw will be obtained. Pitch
motion is achieved by a simultaneous increase/decrease in tilt angle of
rotors [92,93]. In Fig. 24(a) and (b), the view of thrust-vectoring and
motions of VTOL bi-rotors are shown, respectively.
Chalupa et al. investigated the mathematical model of the Vertical
Take-Off and Landing (VTOL) bi-rotor [94]. This type of drone performs
better than helicopters because they do not require a stabilizing hori­
zontal tail; Moreover, their stability is higher than mono-rotors and
helicopters. Numerous cases of this type of drone have been made and
tested. In 2011, Papachristos et al. developed a design and control
mechanism for an unmanned Tilt-Rotor aerial vehicle [95]. Agarwal
et al. in 2013, designed and built a prototype of a VTOL bi-rotor [93]. In
2020, in partnership with Trek Aerospace Inc, NASA has developed a
VTOL bi-rotor with a ducted fan assembly [96]. Another novel concept
of bi-rotors is being developed by Darvishpoor et al. based on moving
mass control. They have used two rotors in the middle of a square frame
and four moving masses for controlling the attitude [82]. In Fig. 25,
views of bio-rotors drones are shown.

oppose the reaction torque. In Fig. 23 (a), an all rotating mono-rotor
view using the H-∞ controller developed by Toledo et al. is shown
[90]. Bouabdallah et al. in 2006, introduced a concept of mono-rotor
using Magnus rotors for attitude control. Based on their claim, this
concept is more efficient than other conventional mono-rotor UASs and
has easier control (see Fig. 23(b)). They also developed a prototype of a
mono-rotor using three other rotors for attitude control (see Fig. 23(c))
[81].
3.2. Multirotors UASs
Multirotors UASs consist of two or more rotors and propellers. The
flight mechanism of these drones is based on the generation of lift by
propellers. These drones are controlled by altering the speed of the ro­
tors [5]. Among multirotors drones, quadrotors are very popular, and
over thousands of them have been built over the past few decades
beacause of their ease of construction and control [5].
These drones can fly with high (not higher than common fixed-wing
or hybrid drones) or low speeds, perform vertical take-off and landing,
and hover flight. Multirotors UASs can be used for indoor or outdoor
missions [5]. Since their endurance is short, they are more suitable for
short-range travel or short-time missions [91]. Multirotors are ideal for
specific missions, and their configuration depends on the mission re­
quirements. For example, if the drone is supposed to perform a
maneuverable mission, the mono-rotor, moving mass controlled
bi-rotor, or quadrotor configurations can be considered. But when it
comes to efficiency, the quadrotors may not be suitable choices.
Although the rotary wings have simple control systems and are very
maneuverable, their main disadvantage is power consumption.
Furthermore, weight and energy are some of the critical challenges in
multirotors [5].
Multirotors can be found as fixed rotors, tilt-rotors, ducted fans,
coaxial rotors, moving mass controlled, and Dyson fans. In the following
subsections, different kinds of multirotors will be studied based on the
number of rotors.

3.2.1.1. Challenges and benefits. Although multirotors drones with more
than four rotors are more reliable in motor failure, multirotors with
three or two rotors may prefer when high efficiency is desired. It has
been indicated that a large single rotor is more efficient than multiple
small rotors with equal rotor areas. Therefore, bi-rotors and tri-rotors
are more efficient than multirotors with more than four rotors. How­
ever, bi-rotors are underactuated systems, and there is always a need for
11

S. Darvishpoor et al.

Progress in Aerospace Sciences 121 (2020) 100694

Fig. 24. Views of (a) thrust-vectoring [92], and (b) motion of a VTOL bi-rotor [93].

Fig. 25. Views of (a) ducted-propeller bi-rotor developed by NASA and Trek [96], (b) VTOL bi-rotor developed by Papachristos [95], (c) moving mass controlled
bi-rotor developed by Darvishpoor et al. [82].

other mechanisms like tilt rotor or moving masses to stabilize and
control them [97].

mounted on a servo motor, is used to maintain the drone balance [5]. In
Fig. 26, the flight mechanisms of tri-rotors are shown [98]. The motors
of tri-rotor UASs, similar to other VTOLs, have the same speeds during
takeoff and landing. Fig. 26(a) indicates that with increasing or
decreasing the speed of each rotor, the altitude can increase or decrease,
respectively. In Fig. 26(b), the roll control is shown, that in this mode,
the rotor speeds of the two front rotors are varying differently. The pitch

3.2.2. Tri-rotors
This category of UAS consists of three motors that are usually located
on the sides of an equilateral triangle. Reaction torques of two motors
are neutralized together, and the torque of the third motor, which is

Fig. 26. Scenarios for (a) altitude, (b) roll, (c) pitch, and (d) yaw control of tri-rotors [98].
12

S. Darvishpoor et al.

Progress in Aerospace Sciences 121 (2020) 100694

opposite motors are not equal, the drone will rotate about the longitu­
dinal and lateral axes. Fig. 28(a)-28(c) illustrate the speed condition of
the motors in yaw, roll, and pitch motion, respectively.
45-degree rotation of quadcopter around the z-axis creates another
common structure of this type of drone, which is called X structure. X
structure also flies in the similar way as the (+) structure. Numerous
researches have been conducted on the linear and nonlinear dynamical
modeling of the quadrotors using various methods. One of the
comprehensive activities in this field is the research done by Sabatino in
2015 [104]. This type of drone has plenty of advantages, among other
configurations, such as low cost, high maneuverability, easy control,
simple dynamics, and applying a fixed-pitch propeller. On the other
hand, the disadvantages of this type of drone include low endurance due
to the use of electric motors and the limited capacity of batteries for
them (high capacity batteries are not lightweight enough yet) and the
dangers of using them in urban environments [104]. A comprehensive
review is done by Amezquita-Brooks et al. on the modeling and control
of the quadrotors in order to represent a standard design model [105].
Several drones have been developed with a quadrotor structure. Rones,
in 2017, designed and prototyped a quadrotor with a ducted structure
for propellers [106]. In 2018, Rivellini developed a ducted quadrotor
drone with embedded fans, which increases safety and makes it appro­
priate for daily use, specifically in urban environments [107]. In Fig. 29
(a) and (b), views of quadrotors designed by Rones and Rivellini are
shown, respectively.
There are also some configurations of quadrotors that are made
coaxially. In this type of drone, eight rotors are arranged coaxially
coupled in the form of a quadrotor. The performance of this drone is
similar to that of quadrotors, except that there must be a Δω decrease or
increase in rotational speed of coupled coaxial motors so that their
rotation around their common axis generates torque. Similarly, there
must be a speed difference between the other motors whose torque is
required to perform the maneuvers, as described in the quadrotor sec­
tion. It should be noted that the flight mechanism and the dynamic
modeling of this configuration of drones are similar to the quadrotors.
Chen et al. in 2011, presented the modeling and neuro-fuzzy adaptive
attitude control for these types of quadrotors [108]. These coaxial
quadrotors have greater stability than other quadrotors due to the
neutralization of the torques generated by each rotor by the coupled
coaxial rotor [109]. Numerous examples of this type of quadrotor have
been developed. In Fig. 30(a)-30(c), views of coaxial quadrotors are
shown.
Like mono-rotors and other multirotors, quadrotors have also been
developed with tilt-rotor structure. Unlike fixed-rotors, these types of
quadrotors are mounted on a mechanism that enables them to be tilted.
In 2019, Ji et al. developed the mathematical modeling of a general
tilting quadrotor considering parametric uncertainties and external
disturbances [112]. The overall flight mechanism of this type of drone is
generally similar to quadrotors; however, thrust vectoring may be used
for pitch maneuver rather than an increase or decrease in motors speeds.
In these drones, like other tilt-rotors, the motors are driven by servo
motors. Generally, the tilt-rotor quadcopters have higher maneuver­
ability and efficiency; however, they have more complex control and
dynamics compared to quadrotors [113].
In 2013, Şenkul and Altuğ modeled a novel tilt-roll rotor quadrotor
UAV [114]. Nemati and Kumar, in 2016, studied the dynamics of a
tilt-rotor quadrotor and worked on the control and hardware re­
quirements of these drones [113]. In addition to these studies, various
experimental and commercial tilt-rotor quadcopters have been devel­
oped. In 2018, Bin Junaid et al. proposed a tilting mechanism to enhance
the performance characteristics of conventional quadrotors. They also
presented the design, modeling, simulation, and prototyping of a
dual-axis tilting quadcopter [115]. In Fig. 31, views of tilting quad­
copters are shown.
In addition to thrust vectoring for controlling quadrotors, one of the
other proposed mechanisms is the use of moving mass control. In 2016,

control is indicated in Fig. 26(c). In this flight scenario, the two front
rotors have the same angular velocity, and the speed of the rear rotor is
varying for pitch control. Regarding the yaw control, as shown in Fig. 26
(d), by using the yawing moment from the reaction torque and also from
the tilt angle, yaw control can be achieved [98].
There are many commercial and non-commercial examples of the
VTOL tri-rotor. In 2008, Escareño et al. conducted a simulation and
control design of a tri-rotor drone [99]. In 2015, Sai and Tun derived the
flight dynamics modeling of a tri-copter UAS [98]. Kastelan et al., in
2015 also developed a tri-copter unmanned aerial vehicle with three
tilting motors [100]. In Fig. 27, views of some commercial and
non-commercial examples of the VTOL tri-rotor drones are shown.
3.2.2.1. Challenges and benefits. Tri-rotors, compared to quadrotors and
other multirotors, are smaller in size, less expensive, and have less
complexity. They also have more flexibility and great agility. They can
fly for a longer time due to the reduction in the number of motors. These
characteristics make tri-rotors drones an ideal configuration for
deployment in various missions [102]. Tri-rotors UASs’ dynamics are
nonlinear and highly coupled, making their control system design more
challenging compared to quadrotors. Due to the asymmetric configu­
ration of these drones, their yaw control is also problematic. Further­
more, pitch, roll and yaw moments are highly coupled in these drones,
and their attitude control is challenging compared to quadrotors due to
Coriolis gyroscopic and terms [102].
3.2.3. Quadrotors
Since their emergence, quadrotors have quickly gained popularity
among drones designers because of their ease of construction and con­
trol. Plenty of research has been conducted on this type of drone. This
study investigates some of the drones that are developed based on this
configuration with different flight mechanisms. A common set of
quadrotors are made with fixed rotors. This conventional type of
quadrotor consists of four motors and propellers mounted on four
vertices of a square frame. The motors belonging to this category rotate
in pairs opposite to each other to counteract the reaction torque caused
by the rotation of the motor and the propellers. This vehicle moves in
such a way that the two propellers facing each other rotate in the same
direction and opposite to the other couple propellers (their pitch is
opposite to that of the other two propellers). To increase or decrease the
altitude, the speed of the motors should be increased or decreased
simultaneously. Quadcopters can also rotate around the yaw axis with
an increase in clockwise rotors speed and a decrease in counterclockwise rotors speed and vice versa [103]. Fig. 28(a) shows the
motor speeds on the yaw maneuver. In quadcopters, if the torques of the

Fig. 27. Views of commercial tri-rotors (a) FlyFly Hobby RC Tri-rotor, (b) DK
CX-33S RC [101], and (c & d) tri-rotor developed by Escareño et al. [99].
13

S. Darvishpoor et al.

Progress in Aerospace Sciences 121 (2020) 100694

Fig. 28. Views of motors speeds in a quadrotor for (a) yaw, (b) roll, and (c) pitch motion [103].

Fig. 29. Views of (a) Ducted-fan quadrotor developed by Rones [106], and (b) ducted quadrotor drone with embedded fans developed by Rivellini [107].

Fig. 30. Views of coaxial quadrotors developed by (a) Tashreef et al. [110], (b) Haddadi and Zarafshan [109], and (c) Saied et al. [111].

Fig. 31. Views of (a) XRay tilt-rotor quad DIY ARF FPV [116], (b) Tilt-rotor quadrotor designed by Ben Junaid et al. [115], and (c) Inspire 1 Pro tilt-rotor quadrotor
developed by DJI [117].

Haus et al. presented a novel concept of attitude control for large mul­
tirotor drones based on moving mass control [74] (see Fig. 32). Haus
et al. in other studies besides the modeling of quadrotors with moving
mass control, investigated the control [118], stability and feasibility
[75], and other design parameters [119] of this kind of drone. In this
type of quadrotors, several rails are mounted on the arms of the drone
that allow the servo motor to move along it. To perform the pitch mo­
tion, the masses on the quadrotor’s arms are moved along the longitu­
dinal axis that consequently changes the center of mass. In this motion,
due to the difference in the arm length of the thrust force generated by
propellers, the torque cannot be neutralized, and the quadrotor will

rotate around lateral axis. For roll maneuver, the masses move along the
transverse arms, and the yaw maneuver is generated similar to con­
ventional quadrotors. Generally, in this type of quadrotor, the maximum
power of the motors is used, which increases its efficiency. However, in
addition to requiring a reliable moving mass control mechanism, these
quadrotors have a more complicated control, manufacturing process,
and mathematical model compared to other types. These happen due to
the variable center of mass and moment of inertia [75].
For quadrotors, some unexplored ideas based on the use of the Dyson
fan have been proposed by researchers. Dyson fan was patented in 2009
by a designer under the same name. A patent was also filed in 1981 by
14

S. Darvishpoor et al.

Progress in Aerospace Sciences 121 (2020) 100694

Fig. 32. Quadrotor designed by House et al. [74].

3.2.3.1. Challenges and benefits. In recent years, quadrotors have
received extensive attention from drone designers and scholars world­
wide due to their simple structure, easy operation, low energy con­
sumption, and hovering flight capability. The design of a control system
for trajectory tracking of quadrotors is challenging because of their
control characteristics, such as strong coupling, nonlinearity, and
sensitivity to disturbance. Quadrotors have six degrees of freedom,
including three attitude angles and three-position variables. However,
these drones only have four control inputs, making them a typical underactuated system [124]. Quadrotors have short endurance because of
using electrically powered motors. Recently, researchers have focused
on the fuel-powered version of these UASs. Compared to fixed-wing
drones, quadrotors are less efficient and have a lower cruise speed,
and their maximum altitude is limited. These drawbacks make them
inappropriate for long-endurance missions. Due to their VTOL and hover
flight capability, they are among the best configurations for a short time
and indoor missions.
3.2.4. Penta-rotor and higher
The flight mechanism of multirotors having more than four rotors is
similar to those of the previous four categories. Reaction torque is not
considered a problem for drones with even rotors; however, a similar
approach is used for drones with odd rotors as introduced for a monorotor or tri-rotor drone. In Fig. 35, views of hexarotor drones are
indicated.

Fig. 33. Views of airflow motion steps from a Dyson fan [121].

Toshiba [120]. In this type of fan, a compressor guides the air to a ring.
The curve of the ring is designed in such a way that air flows over it and
continues horizontally. In Fig. 33, schematic views of airflow motion
steps from a Dyson fan are demonstrated [121].
Dyson fan has high noise pollution and low efficiency. For this
reason, the idea of designing an unmanned aerial vehicle based on the
Dyson fan has not yet materialized. Due to the increasing safety of UASs
with removing the propellers and the proper maneuverability and
hovering capability of quadrotors, combining a quadrotor with a Dyson
fan can be very suitable for urban spaces. In Fig. 34, concepts of Dyson
fan quadrotors are shown [122,123].

3.2.4.1. Challenges and benefits. Compared to other multirotors, using
more than four rotors increases the payload capacity, dynamics
complexity, and energy consumption. Even though having multiple ro­
tors increases drones’ safety in the case of motor failure, they are less
efficient compared to drones that use fewer rotors with equal propeller

Fig. 34. Views of (a) a Dyson fan bladeless drone [122], and (b) HERA conceptual design based on Dyson fan [123].
15

S. Darvishpoor et al.

Progress in Aerospace Sciences 121 (2020) 100694

Fig. 35. Views of (a) Typhoon H hexarotor developed by Yuneec [125], and (b) a tilted-rotor hexarotor developed by Ryll et al. [126].

area. While UASs with an even number of rotors do not need any extra
mechanism, the UASs with odd rotors may need additional mechanisms
to counteract the sole rotor’s reaction torque. However, using more
rotors makes the control algorithms more complex. This configuration,
obviously like other multirotors, benefits from vertical takeoff and
landing and hover flight. They are more popular for applications that
need to carry heavy payloads because of having more payload capacity.
These UASs are so popular in agricultural applications, industrial in­
spection, delivery, firefighting and longtime monitoring, but the high
energy consumption is one of their major problems.
3.3. Coanda-effect UASs
Fig. 37. Views of Coanda-effect UAS developed by Haque et al. [132].

The Coanda effect that is described by Henri Coanda in 1932 is the
tendency of flow to stay attached to a convex surface. In Coanda-effect
UASs, passing flow through the surface leads to a static pressure drop
that will create a lift force. The first dome-shaped UAS was developed by
Collins in 2002 that was called Coanda UAV [127]. In this kind of drone,
generally, a propeller sucks the air into the duct installed on the upper
part of UAS and then guides the high-speed airflow over its surface. This
high-speed airflow through this convex surface is accelerated and causes
a static pressure drop, which forms the major part of the lift force for
flight [127]. To avoid rotation of this UAS, some fixed fins are imple­
mented on the outer surface of the body, which changes the airflow
direction. This creates a torque that is in the opposite direction of the
torque generated by blades. Moreover, in order to control the UAS, a
number of moving control surfaces are added to its body that can be used
for controlling the drone. In these UASs, there are some controllable
stabilizing fins that can be used for directional control around the yaw
axis. In Fig. 36, views of UAS with the Coanda effect are shown.
In contrast to the ducted fan and fixed-wing UASs, in the Coanda
effect drones, the equipment and supplies can be placed inside the body.
This type of UAS also produces less sound pollution and is safer and
more convenient than multirotors and helicopters for use in urban areas.
However, it has relatively more complex aerodynamics, and its dynamic
is highly dependent on the shape of the body. Nedelcut, in 2010,
reviewed different kinds of Coanda effect UASs in detail [130]. In 2013,
Collins studied the aerodynamic modeling of a Coanda-effect UAS
[131]. In 2015, Haque et al. developed a new Coanda-effect UAS using
two rotors without ducts to generate lift force and achieve

maneuverability in a more efficient manner (see Fig. 37) [132].
3.3.1. Challenges and benefits
The lift force in the Coanda-effect UASs is produced by deflecting and
guiding the generated airflow along the body’s outer side. Therefore, the
inside of the body would be appropriate for placing the cargo. In these
UASs, the airflow necessary to create lift forces is not dependent on the
altitude or the angle of attack, unlike fixed-wing UASs, which makes
them more stable during the flight. The Coanda-effect UASs are not as
vulnerable as conventional fixed-wings or helicopters to impacts against
ceilings, walls, etc., so they may bump into obstacles without losing
altitude or being damaged [133].
3.4. Lighter than air UASs
Lighter than air UASs includes balloons and airships. In these aerial
vehicles, light gases such as hot air or hydrogen are used in bulk (vol­
uminous) chambers to reduce the overall density of the system. Various
mechanisms can be used to control these UASs, including the moving
mass mechanism or propeller (see Fig. 38) [134]. Balloons are mainly
used for meteorological and research purposes, some in the atmosphere,
and some under near-space conditions. Recently, unmanned balloons
have also been used to provide internet services. In this kind of UAS,
usually, the altitude of the balloons is controlled only, and there is no
control over their position due to the type of applications and the
weather. Therefore, it can be said that they are usually
offline-controlled. There is a kind of lighter-than-air UAS called jellyfish,
categorized as bio-based because of simulating jellyfish behavior.
In airships, the thrust is usually provided by ducted fans or pro­
pellers. In some cases, (micro) jet thrust mechanisms are used to
generate the required thrust and control the airship. These kinds of
mechanisms can also adjust the flight altitude of the airships. Besides,
the airships can use elevators and rudders for better control and wind
resistance [134,135]. Features of lighter-than-air UASs include low
power consumption, high endurance, and relatively simple dynamics
and control. The challenges of using these aerial vehicles include large
dimensions, risks of hydrogen use, and problems with material selection

Fig. 36. Views of (a) Coanda-effect UAV [128], and (b) control surfaces in a
Coanda-effect UAV [129].
16

S. Darvishpoor et al.

Progress in Aerospace Sciences 121 (2020) 100694

rigid airships have a rigid keel along the bottom of their envelope to
distribute suspension loads on to the envelope. Among the discussed
airships, nowadays, the non-rigid airships are the most favorable con­
figurations. By inflating or deflating the airbags inside the hull (ballo­
nets) across altitudes, this type of airship maintains a sufficient pressure
difference between the surrounding air and the internal lifting gas
[141].
3.4.1. Challenges and benefits
Unmanned airships are known for their low energy consumption and
the ability to provide communication for commercial and military
missions. Compared to other UASs such as fixed-wing and helicopters,
these lighter-than-air drones need much less power since the buoyancy
balances the gravity. Also, solar panels can be integrated into this type of
UASs to provide the required energy. Winds can highly affect the airship
motion due to their large volume, slow speed and low-maneuverability
[142]. Generally, depending on the interaction of aerostatics forces
between the airship and air, which provides the most of the required lift,
the flight behavior of these UASs is changing. In airships dynamics
analysis, the aerodynamic computation becomes an important issue
since their aerostatics is simple to derive. In dynamic modeling of air­
ships, their flight characteristics, which can be strongly affected by at­
mospheric turbulence, should also be considered [141].

Fig. 38. View of an actuation mechanism for an unmanned airship [134].

and balloon design. A number of these UASs have been manufactured
and used for various applications, such as meteorology, imaging, or
advertising (see Fig. 39). In 2006, Gammon et al. derived the mathe­
matical modeling and flight dynamics of the tri-turbofan airship for
autonomous formation control research [135].
The airships can be found in different shapes and configurations.
They can vary in the shape of the balloons and actuators. Some concepts
came up by adding wings to the balloons that can work with various
kinds of light gases like hydrogen or hot-air (see Fig. 40). Liao and
Pasternak, in 2009, have reviewed the progress and developments in the
airships with a focus on their structure [140]. Li et al. in 2011, have also
reviewed the researches about dynamics modeling of airships [141].
In airships, the most flexible part is the hull. Airships are categorized
into three main sub-categories based on their hull structure, including
rigid airships, semi-rigid airships, and non-rigid airships. Airships with a
rigid hull structure have multiple balloons or non-pressurized gas cells
to generate lift. There is an inflated envelope in non-rigid and semi-rigid
airships as a hull, where the hull shape is maintained by pressure level
more than the surrounding air pressure. Unlike non-rigid ones, semi-

3.5. Helicopter UASs
Helicopters consist of a rotor with one or more blades that are
controlled by a swash-plate and a fan-tail or stabilizing propeller. In
helicopters, the thrust force is generated by the propeller. To overcome
the reaction torque resulting from the rotation of the propeller, usually,
a tail with a propeller or fan is applied to produce a resistant torque.
Moreover, the speed of this fan determines the yaw motion. In heli­
copters, pitch and roll motions can be achieved by using a swash-plate. A
mechanism in the helicopter provides the ability to tilt the rotating plate
at longitudinal and lateral axes. In Fig. 41(a), a view of the swash-plate
function is indicated.
In 2010, Salazar proposed mathematical modeling and simulation
for a helicopter with a tail rotor [143]. Muhammad et al. in 2015,
modeled and simulated the dynamics of a micro coaxial helicopter
[144]. Generally, helicopters have high maneuverability and, due to
applying fuel engines, have a high endurance compared to typically

Fig. 39. View of (a) AS-800 B Airship [136], (b & c) AS-500 Airship [137,138], and (d) Lotte Airship [139].
17

S. Darvishpoor et al.

Progress in Aerospace Sciences 121 (2020) 100694

Fig. 40. View of different concepts of unmanned airships [140].

Fig. 41. View of (a) swash-plate function [149], (b) unmanned tandem-rotor helicopter developed by DPI UAV Systems [85], and (c) SY260H coaxial unmanned
helicopter [150].

electrical multirotors. However, they have more complex dynamics and
control and relatively higher noise pollution. In most cases, the gyro­
scopic effects of the propeller with high mass and momentum of inertia
complicate their control [145,146]. Almost all types of manned heli­
copters have also been developed in an unmanned version. In Fig. 41(b)
and (c), views of unmanned helicopters are shown [85,144]. Different
studies have been conducted on the aerodynamics and modeling of the
helicopters. Conlisk, in 2001, reviewed modern helicopters’ aero­
dynamics with different shapes and numbers of rotors [147]. In 2013,
Brocklehurst and Barakos studied and covered the different tip shapes in
helicopter rotors [148].

“rotating body” or “rotating aircraft” can be used for this type of UAS,
and they are also known as All Rotating Aircrafts. The main idea of
mono-rotors is inspired by the Maple Seeds that are called Samara.
3.6.1. Single-wing rotor UASs
Single wing-rotor, half-wing rotor, or wing and rotor, which is also
called Monocopter, consists of a wing and a rotor attached to it [5].
Following rotor rotation and thrust generation, the wing rotates around
the center of gravity and produce the required lift force. The center of
gravity of this UAS usually lies somewhere between the wing, control
board, and batteries. Generally, the single-wing rotor UAS is designed in
such a way that the center of gravity is out of the wing. The distance of
generated thrust force from the center of gravity creates a torque that
will rotate the drone around its vertical axis. The rotation of the drone
subsequently rotates the wing that generates the lift force [152].
The flight altitude of this type of drone can be controlled by an in­
crease or decrease in the speed of the motor. In single-wing rotor UASs, a
mechanism is applied to tilt the rotating wing that is called cyclic pitch
(see Fig. 42) [152]. During each rotation of this kind of drone, the angle
of attack is changed through the control surface embedded in the wing to
produce more lift when the wing is in the forward phase and less lift
when it is in the backward phase (and vice versa) [152,153].
In 2015, Matiè et al. proposed a mathematical model for a monocopter based on unsteady blade-element momentum theory [155].
One of the most important features of this type of UAS is its inherent
stability in hovering flight and static flight. This drone has simple
mechanisms, few actuators, simple shape and configuration, and has

3.5.1. Challenges and benefits
Like other VTOL UASs, helicopters have remarkable capabilities to
perform vertical taking-off and landing and hovering flight in complex
and unknown environments at low altitudes and speeds. Because of
these advantages, helicopters have a variety of military and civil ap­
plications. Unmanned helicopters are recognized as multi-input, multioutput, underactuated nonlinear systems with a strongly coupled dy­
namic [151]. These drones have the most challenging control systems
due to their complex swash-plate mechanism, gyroscopic effects, and
stabilizing tail-rotor.
3.6. Wing-rotor UASs
Instead of a propeller or a combination of wing and tail, these drones
consist of a rotary-wing that forms the entire UAS’s body. The terms
18

S. Darvishpoor et al.

Progress in Aerospace Sciences 121 (2020) 100694

Fig. 42. Cyclic pitch mechanism in Single-wing rotor drone [154].

more endurance than other types. However, it cannot be easily aero­
dynamically modeled because of flight at low Reynolds numbers [152,
153]. The first mono-copter was designed by the Defense Advanced
Research Projects Agency (DARPA), inspiring by the free flight of maple
seeds. It should be noted that these drones also can be categorized as
bio-inspired UASs. In 2014, Safaee et al. developed a novel version of
wing-rotor UAS using some new elements like winglet and fly bar, to
decrease the cone angle of flying and reduce the sided turbulence motion
of the system [152]. In Fig. 43(a)–43(c), views of the single-wing rotor
drones are shown.

Fig. 44. An example of a two-wing rotor UAS [158].

obvious roll and pitch axes. These drones can orientate and define these
two axes (roll and pitch) by heading measurement. Once these axes are
defined, the wing’s control surface can be controlled with high precision
for the rolling and pitching motion. There are multiple solutions to
obtain the heading direction of a wing-rotor UASs, such as magnetom­
eter reading, and using extended Kalman filter beside gyroscope,
magnetometer, and accelerometer as inclinometer [153]. Besides the
absolute heading angle, the rotating speed of these drones is an impor­
tant parameter for their flight control. The rotating speed allows the
drone to reach and maintain the optimal cruise speed to achieve
maximum efficiency. It also allows the control system to detect and
correct some unsafe occurrences such as stalling and over speed [153].

3.6.2. Two-wing rotor UASs
The structure of this UAS is similar to the single-wing rotor, except
that it uses two wings to fly instead of one wing. Both wings are
equipped with control surfaces for control. The mechanism of the twowing rotor UAS is similar to the single-wing rotor, with this difference
that one wing being in the forward-swept phase and the other being in
the backward-swept phase. Therefore, the angle of attack located in the
backward-swept phase must be exactly the opposite of the other wing if
a “symmetric wing” is used. This drone generates more lifting power
and, at the same time, has a more complex control algorithm. In Fig. 44,
a view of a two-wing rotor UAS is shown.

3.7. Cyclocopter UASs
This class of VTOL drones uses multiple wings or fins mounted on a
rotating axis as a series of pedals to generate lift force [5]. In cyclo­
copters, the rotors move like watermill or bicycle pedals. At first, these
UASs required an initial speed and were hand-thrown; however, newer
ones fly vertically. Generally, in some of the unmanned aerial vehicles,
cyclic rotors can be used instead of propellers [5,161]. Different types of
multirotors can be potentially developed in this configuration, as illus­
trated in Fig. 45.
In Fig. 46, a concept view of a cyclic aircraft is shown. As can be seen,
the two displayed pedals are rotated using the engine power. The angleof-attack of fins is controlled by the control mechanism. Accordingly,
this aircraft can be controlled almost like tri-rotors, except that the
generated reaction torque by the pedals can be neutralized by a rotor
embedded in the tail.
Generally, no lift force is produced if the angle of attack of all fins is

3.6.2.1. Challenges and benefits. Wing-rotors are considered as allrotating powered flight unmanned vehicles. Due to their simple,
concise structure and less moveable parts, these kinds of drones are easy
to manufacture and maintain [159]. Wing-rotor UASs have vertical
takeoff and landing, as well as the hovering flight modes where these
features allow them to operate in the confined environment [160]. The
significant advantage of wing-rotors is that they are passively stable
[159]. The most important challenge in wing-rotors is the difficulty of
determining the orientations of the drone. The solution is to use the
absolute heading angle with respect to the magnetic or true north. The
absolute heading allows these unmanned systems to have the proper
pitch and roll control. Due to the spinning, these drones do not have

Fig. 43. Views of designed and prototyped single-wing rotor drones by (a) Shaohui [156], (b) Ulrich et al. [157], and (c) Safaee et al. [152].
19

S. Darvishpoor et al.

Progress in Aerospace Sciences 121 (2020) 100694

Fig. 45. Views of cyclic drones [161].

blade pitching mechanism [165]. Benedict et al. in 2014, designed a
micro twin-rotor cyclocopter capable of autonomous hover [166] (see
Fig. 48(a). In 2016, Shrestha et al. proposed control strategies for a
twin-cyclocopter in forward flight (see Fig. 48(b)) [161].
3.7.1. Challenges and benefits
Cyclocopter UASs have many advantages, such as higher aero­
dynamic efficiency (in terms of power loading), maneuverability, and
high-speed forward flight capability in comparison with a conventional
helicopter with the same disk loading (thrust per unit actuator area)
[166]. Cyclocopters have a uniform aerodynamic loading on their blade,
and favorable unsteady phenomena such as the leading-edge vortex
formation enable their blades to operate at very high lift coefficients and
low rotational speeds to produce the same thrust [167]. In cyclocopters,
by changing the phase of cyclic blade pitching, a full 360 deg instan­
taneous thrust vectoring can be achieved. This enables them to be gust
tolerant and more maneuverable, and easily transit from hover to
high-speed forward flight [167]. Cyclorotor UASs can obtain the
required thrust at a significantly lower rotational speed than an equiv­
alent conventional rotor [168]. They can perform the hovering flight
like multirotors. However, they have more complex flight mechanisms
and control design compared to multirotors or unmanned helicopters.

Fig. 46. concept view of a cyclic aircraft [162].

the same. Therefore, the angle of attack of the fins, as shown in Fig. 47
(a), in the backward-swept phase, is reduced by a mechanism in such a
way that the generated lift by the set of fins will be positive [162].
Fig. 47(b) indicates the status of the fins of a cyclocopter in a complete
cycle. Cyclocopters perform better in generating lift force, with rela­
tively less noise pollution. However, they have a more complex oper­
ating mechanism and also complex dynamic and aerodynamic modeling
[163]. Furthermore, they have a low cruise speed and high vibration.
Mcnabb, in 2001, conducted a study on the modeling of a cyclo­
copter and compared the simulation results with experiments [164]. In
2006, Yu et al. derived the dynamic modeling of a cyclocopter [162].
Besides these studies, in 2013, Adams et al. developed and tested a
small-scale cyclocopter that was utilizing a novel cam-based passive

4. Hybrid UASs
Hybrid UASs are combinations of VTOL and HTOL aerial vehicles.
This category of drones has the benefits of both groups simultaneously
with greater efficiency and performance. In the last few decades, hybrid
UASs have attracted the attention of researchers and companies. The
development of hybrid UASs is still in its infancy, and there is a
considerable space for design philosophy, dynamics modeling, control,
guidance, navigation, and robustness of these types of drones. Hybrid
drones have much more complex flight dynamics than fixed-wing and

Fig. 47. Views of (a) angle-of-attack of fins to generate lift force [162] and (b) the status of the fins of a cyclic aircraft in a complete cycle [163].
20

S. Darvishpoor et al.

Progress in Aerospace Sciences 121 (2020) 100694

Fig. 48. Views of cyclocopter developed by (a) Benedict et al. [166], and (b) Shrestha et al. [161].

multirotors drones, specifically during their transition phase [21]. In the
following sections, we will review the different types of hybrid drones. A
major group of hybrid UASs uses tilting mechanisms to switch between
HTOL and VTOL configurations, including tilt-body, tilt-wing and
tilt-rotor UASs, while another approach is using non-tilting solutions,
such as dual-system and rotary-wing UASs.

required to control the UAS. At the bottom of the UAS, there is a tail,
which besides its stabilizing role in cruise flight, acts as the aircraft
support in the landing and takeoff phases.
Flight of hybrid UASs consists of three phases, namely landing/
takeoff, the transition phase, and the cruise phase. The transition phase
is accomplished using control surfaces embedded in the tail and wing
and the cruise phase is performed, similar to fixed-wings. The equations
of motion of this type of drones are similar to those of fixed-wings. In
addition to the benefits of fixed-wings, including long endurance, they
will not require a runway for landing and takeoff. However, like other
hybrid drones, the transition phase of this UAS has its own complexities
[5,21]. Various types of UASs have been developed as a result of
combining this type of drones with other aerial vehicles. For example, as
indicated in Fig. 50(a), Kubo and Suzuki, in 2008, attempted to model
and design two-tail tail-sitter controllers [172]. In 2015, Wang et al.
simulated and modeled an agile tail-sitter drone with four tails and ro­
tors on them (see Fig. 50(b)) [173]. Even a version of these UASs with
morphing wings was developed by Ke et al., in 2016 (see Fig. 50(c))
[174].
The Flexrotor tail-sitter designed by Aerovel Company uses a vari­
able pitch propeller to create roll/pitch torque in the hovering phase and
vertical landing and takeoff. As shown in Fig. 51, two small rotors are
employed at the end of the wings, which are rotating in opposite di­
rections to prevent yaw rotation in these phases [21,175].
Several attempts have been made to combine ducted fans with tail-

4.1. Tilt-hybrid UASs
In this category of UASs, all or part of the body is designed to be
capable of tilting so that the drone can perform landing and takeoff
phases vertically and the cruise phase horizontally, similar to HTOLs.
4.1.1. Tilt-body UASs
Unlike tilt-rotors and tilt-wings, in this category of drones, the whole
body experiences a 90-degree rotation to perform a hybrid flight. Tailsitters form an important category of the UASs, introduced by Nikola
Tesla, a prominent American-Croatian scientist in 1928 [169]. However,
the first XFY-1 and XFV-1 aircraft were manufactured by Convair and
Lockheed in the 1950s [21]. As their name implies, tail-sitters have a
vertical rocket-like landing and takeoff phase and fly in the cruise phase
horizontally. Their mechanisms in cruise flight can be similar to those of
fixed-wings or can be performed using other methods. As shown in
Fig. 49, the structure of a typical tail-sitter aerial vehicle consists of two
contra-rotating rotors at the nose of the body and the control surfaces

Fig. 49. Views of (a) a hybrid unmanned tail-sitter [170], and (b) the overall structure of a tail-sitter UAS [171].
21

S. Darvishpoor et al.

Progress in Aerospace Sciences 121 (2020) 100694

Fig. 50. Views of (a) tail-sitter developed by Kubo and Suzuki [172], (b) tail-sitter designed by Wang et al. [173], morphing wing tail-sitter developed by Ke
et al. [174].

Fig. 51. Flexrotor tail-sitter made by Aerovel Company [175].

sitters. Integrating a ducted fan into the tail-sitter UASs allows the use of
individually controlled ducted-fan fins alongside with control surfaces
to control the drone. In 2009, Zhao explored the idea of a ducted-fan tailsitter. Finally, after modeling, simulating, and designing the controller,
it has led to the construction of a prototype that is a combination of a
ducted-fan mono-rotor and a fixed-wing (see Fig. 52) [176]. Jung et al.,
in 2013, attempted to design, simulate, model, and control these
ducted-fan drones (see Fig. 53) [177].
Besides researchers, private sectors like MartinUAV company have
also developed Ducted-fan tail-sitter (see Fig. 54).
Barth et al. in 2018, proposed another type of tail-sitters by turning
the tail into support, and eliminating its operating and stabilizing role.
They have used two fixed rotors to generate thrust and two control
surfaces, and a vertical tail to control the drone, leading to increased
UAS maneuverability [179]. In Fig. 55, a view of the designed UAS by
Barth et al. is shown. Compared to other hybrid UASs, tail-sitters have a

more complex and challenging structure. In this type of drone, the di­
mensions, size, and type of propeller and airfoil must be carefully
selected for both the takeoff/landing and cruising phases. On the other
hand, to reduce airflow disturbance in the landing and takeoff phase, a
wing with a high aspect ratio and a narrow chord is required. However,
this choice in the cruise phase reduces the cargo-carrying capacity
[179]. Also, in cases where a rotor is used, the transition phase is
accomplished by a process called stall and tumble that can leave the UAS
completely out of control. Furthermore, they are unstable in the vertical
flight phase and can hardly land on a moving base. Instead, there are
plenty of options available for designers to design a wing or tail. If more
than one rotor is used, higher speeds can be achieved in the cruise phase.
For this reason, most tail-sitters are still in the design phase and rarely
used massively [21].
The performance of another batch of tilt-body UAS is similar to that
of tail-sitters, except that the tail and wing are combined. This drone is
called a semi-tail-sitter. Unlike tail-sitters, which usually use a rotor,
semi-tail-sitters apply two or more rotors (often with fixed pitch). Flying
wings form a significant part of these drones. In this new combination,
the thrust to weight ratio increases due to the use of more than two
rotors. In this type of UAS, the destructive effects of the wing on the tail
are eliminated, and the weight is reduced due to the removal of the tail.
However, in addition to the disadvantages and challenges of tail-sitters
due to tail removal, control operations are performed with their own
complexities that are requiring a range of specific solutions in most cases
[21]. Semi-tail-sitters are considered to be relatively new flying con­
cepts, with little work being done on their modeling and control. In
2015, Hochstenbach et al. conducted research on the design, control,
and prototyping of a semi-tail-sitter called VertiKUL (see Fig. 56(a))
[180]. This semi-tail-sitters UAS consists of four rotors in quadrotor
configuration and two fixed wings. It does not use control surfaces to
control the drone and performs transition, cruise, and takeoff only by
using its rotors [180]. In 2019, Garcia-Nieto et al. developed a model
with a tilt-rotor structure consisting of two tilt rotors on a delta
wing-body. This drone that has a flying wing concept uses tilt rotors with
no built-in control surfaces (see Fig. 56(b)) [181].
In 2011, Transition Robotics company developed a similar design
called the Quadshot, which utilizes four rotors in the quadrotor
configuration, as well as wings with control surfaces for flight, such as

Fig. 52. Ducted-fan tail-sitter, designed by Zhao [176].
22

S. Darvishpoor et al.

Progress in Aerospace Sciences 121 (2020) 100694

Fig. 53. Ducted-fan tail-sitter, developed by Jung et al. [177].

Fig. 54. Ducted-fan tail-sitter, developed by MartinUAV company [178].

VertiKUL. The octagonal model of this UAS has also been developed by
this company with two parallel wings known as the Jumpship [182]. In
Fig. 57(a) and (b), views of Quadshot and Jumpship UASs are shown,
respectively.
E-flite has developed a VTOL drone called X-VERT with high
maneuverability that uses control surfaces to control the UAS in both
horizontal and vertical flight modes [183]. Chengdu Aircraft Research &
Design Institute (CADI) in China and also Google have designed and
prototyped VTOL drones with flying wing concepts. In flying wings, the
body and wing are integrated, and the drone is controlled by control
surfaces embedded in the body. These UASs often use fixed-pitch rotors.
The drone developed by the Chengdu Institute uses two fixed rotors for
thrust production, while Google uses four rotors for thrust production
[184–186]. Views of these commercial VTOL drones are indicated in
Fig. 58.
In 2018, Reyes successfully modeled, simulated, designed, and built

Fig. 55. Tail-sitter UAS, developed by Barth et al. [179].

Fig. 56. Views of (a) VertiKUL semi-tail-sitter [180] and (b) Semi-tail-sitter developed by Garcia-Nieto et al. [181].
23

S. Darvishpoor et al.

Progress in Aerospace Sciences 121 (2020) 100694

Fig. 57. Views of (a) Quadshot, and (b) Jumpship semi-tail-sitter [182].

Fig. 58. Views of (a) X-VERT manufactured by E-flite Co. [183], (b) VD200 flying wing [184], and (c) Google X-wing [186].

a semi-tail-sitter with four asymmetric rotors (see Fig. 59) [187].
Some efforts have been made to design and manufacture unmanned
semi-tail-sitters with some kind of planar wings. In this category, short
and wide wings with a low aspect ratio similar to flying wings are used
instead of conventional wings. In 2008 Garcia et al. [188] and in 2011,
Ta et al. [189] attempted to design, model, control, and build this type of
UAS. Ta et al. used fixed rotors, while Garcia et al. used tilt rotors to
control the drone (see Fig. 60). In the design of these two UASs, the
vertical tail is designed as long fins on the wing. Also, the fins embedded
at the base of the body help to provide a stable vertical flight and also
play the role of a horizontal tail in the cruise phase.
Some new hybrid drones are created as a result of combining these
UASs with different types of wings. For example, Stone, in 2004,
designed a tail-sitter drone by incorporating T-shape wings [190] (see
Fig. 61(a)). A semi-tail-sitter has been developed by combining a
quadrotor with two fixed wings. This UAS consists of two parallel wings
with four rotors that act as a quadrotor in the takeoff phase and as a
fixed-wing with two parallel wings in the cruise phase. Commercial
versions of this model have been developed by Xplus and ATMOS [21]
(see Fig. 61(b) and (c)).

low cruising speed, low payload capacity and low endurance. In
contrast, the models which use a combined configuration of multirotors
have high cruising speed, high controllability and stability. Tail-sitter
drones can quickly take-off and land vertically. However, they have
reduced efficiency in horizontal flight and vulnerable to crosswinds like
semi tail sitter drones. One of the differences between these types and
semi-tail-sitters is that semi-tail-sitters have more efficient cruise flight
than multirotor-combined tilt-body drones. Ducted-fan tail-sitters have
more efficient rotors (or fans), and there are various design options for
their wing shape [21]. The major challenge in tilt-body drones, like
other hybrid drones, is their complex dynamics and control, especially
during the transition phase.
4.1.2. Tilt-components UASs
In hybrid UASs with tilt components (or hybrid tilt-rotor drones), the
initial orientation of the body is maintained during flight, and only parts
of the aerial vehicle, mainly wings and rotors, rotate [5]. One of the most
popular types of hybrid drones with tilt components is tilt-rotors. In this
category of UAS, all or part of the rotors are tilted, and other parts, such
as wings and body, are fixed in all phases of flight. Tilt-rotors, along with
most multirotor configurations, have been researched and tested. There
are also other types that have been proposed by combining them with
fixed-wing or ducted-fan UASs. This category of UASs takes advantage of
fixed-wing configurations, including high endurance, and does not
require a landing and takeoff runway [5]. Compared to other hybrid
drones, they have a simpler transition mechanism; however, they
require a more complex structure and have a lower aerodynamic effi­
ciency. Like tilt-wings, selecting suitable actuators with acceptable
performance is very challenging in tilt-rotors [21].

4.1.1.1. Challenges and benefits. Over the last two decades, tilt-body
UASs were commonly adopted in developing tactical UASs with the
increasing maturity and cost reduction of miniature drone development
[21]. Ducted fan and tail-sitter drones have an unstable vertical flight,

4.1.2.1. Tilt-rotors. Tilt-rotors act like multirotors in the takeoff phase,
as reviewed in the previous sections, and after the transition phase, they
fly as fixed-wings in the cruise phase. The rotors will handle thrust
generation, and control surfaces will be used to control the UAS. The
original idea of this type of aerial vehicle was first introduced by the Bell
Helicopter Company in 1993 [21]. Subsequently, other examples were
developed by other companies and researchers. For instance, in 2009,
Yanguo and Huanjin designed a flight control system for a small un­
manned tilt-rotor drone [193]. In Fig. 62, a view of this drone has been
shown.
In 2013, AgustaWestland Corporation designed and manufactured a

Fig. 59. Semi-tail-sitter, developed by Reyes [187].
24

S. Darvishpoor et al.

Progress in Aerospace Sciences 121 (2020) 100694

Fig. 60. Views of semi-tail-sitter designed by (a) Ta et al. [189], and (b) Garcia et al. [188].

Fig. 61. Views of Semi-tail-sitter designed by (a) Stone [190], (b) Sampaio et al. [191], and (c) Xplus and ATMOS [192].

Fig. 62. Tilt-rotor drone designed by Yanguo and Huanjin [193].

tilt-rotor drone by combining a delta flying wing with two ducted fans
inside the wings [194]. These type of tilt-rotor drones are more stable in
hovering mode; however, the effect of rotor rotation on the body results
in some problems, especially in the transition phase [194]. In Fig. 63, a
view of this drone is indicated.
Various hybrid tilt-rotors have also been developed using three ro­
tors. For example, in 2014, Carlson proposed a combination of a tiltrotor with a flying wing. In this drone, a third motor is positioned at
the center of the body near the end, which helps the two other motors in

the takeoff process and provides a yaw control (see Fig. 64(a)) [195].
The control surfaces installed on the wings perform roll and pitch ma­
neuvers. In this type of drone, the rear motor does not participate in the
horizontal flight phase, but it is mounted with a 10-degree slope to
provide part of the horizontal force needed in the transition phase [195].
Similar work was conducted by Aktas et al., in 2014 [196]. They applied
two coaxial ducted-fans rotors, in place of the third motor, to generate
lift for vertical flight mode (see Fig. 64(b)) [196]. BirdsEyeView Co. has
developed another similar version with co-axial rotors (see Fig. 64(c))
25

S. Darvishpoor et al.

Progress in Aerospace Sciences 121 (2020) 100694

Fig. 63. Tilt-rotor drone developed by AgustaWestland [194].

Fig. 64. Views of tilt-rotor drones designed by (a) Carlson [195], (b) Aktas et al. [196], and (c) BirdsEyeView Co [197].

[197].
Quantum-Systems company also developed a commercial model of
this type of tilt-rotor drones with three tilt rotors. A third motor is
mounted on the aircraft tail, which is used in all three phases of flight
[198]. Various examples have been designed with a standard fixed-wing
structure with a horizontal and vertical tail, as shown in Fig. 65 [199].
The tilt-rotor UASs have also been developed in the quadrotor
configuration. The Phantom Swift made by Boeing is similar to Murillo
et al.‘s in general, except that it uses a tilting ducted-fan instead of a tilt
rotor and two non-coaxial fans instead of two coaxial fans (see Fig. 66
(a)) [200]. Moreover, Quantum Systems company has designed a com­
mercial drone that uses four motors for the takeoff phase. In this UAS,
two rear motors are not involved in the horizontal cruise phase, and the
front motors generate horizontal thrust (see Fig. 66(b)) [201].
4.1.2.1.1. Challenges and benefits. Nowadays, tilt-rotor UASs are
popular among drone designers because of their flight efficiency, sta­
bility, and controllability. However, tilt-rotors have complexities and
challenging issues in their design, specifically in their transition mode.
This is due to the fact that the transition between vertical and horizontal
configurations necessitates a different control strategy. In tilt-rotor
drones, degradation of stability is usually found at high-speed in
cruise flight, and the equations of motion are highly coupled and
nonlinear [5]. These UASs can be easily equipped with ducted rotors or
co-axial rotors. It is also easy to combine different multirotor configu­
rations with conventional fixed-wing or flying wings to easily benefit
from each configuration’s advantages.

connected motors rotate about 90◦ , but the rest of the body parts re­
mains fixed. Appearance of this type of aerial vehicle dates back to the
1960s and 1970s when Boeing developed its first tilt-wing manned
aircraft [5,21]. Like other hybrid UASs, the flight in this type of drone
consists of three phases, namely vertical landing and takeoff, the tran­
sition phase, and the horizontal cruise phase. In the vertical landing and
takeoff phases, the wings are positioned at an angle of 90◦ so that the
thrust produced by the rotors is applied opposite to the force of weight.
After the transition phase, the UAS will continue to fly as a fixed-wing
aerial vehicle. In the hovering flight, they act like the bi-rotors that
were mentioned earlier [21].
Like other hybrid drones, the transition phase is one of the most
challenging steps. These UASs have nonlinear flight dynamics in tran­
sition mode that should be considered during the design of a suitable
controller. Compared to tilt-rotors, tilt-wings may bring up bigger
challenges to designers and engineers because of the need for stronger
actuators [5,21]. Another challenge of these UASs is the exposure of the
wing to airflow during landing and takeoff modes. Although the speed of
drones in landing and takeoff modes is much slower than that of the
cruise, the lift and drag forces in vertical modes should be considered [5,
21].
In recent years, various examples of hybrid UASs, in particular tiltwings, have been made and studied. Dickeson et al. in 2007, devel­
oped a tilt-wing UAS and studied its aerodynamics and flight efficiency.
Moreover, they proposed a control system for this drone (see Fig. 67(a))
[202]. In 2012, Ostermann et al. proposed a control concept for a
tilt-wing UAS during low-speed maneuvering. They used variable pitch
rotors instead of fixed-pitch rotors in order to have easier control in the
hovering mode, along with the ailerons (see Fig. 67(b)) [203].

4.1.2.2. Tilt-wing UASs. This category of UASs is designed with a fixedwing structure with tilting capability. In these drones, wings and

Fig. 65. Views of tilt-rotor drones designed by (a) Quantum-Systems [198], and (b) Nimbus Co [199].
26

S. Darvishpoor et al.

Progress in Aerospace Sciences 121 (2020) 100694

Fig. 66. Views of tilt-rotor drones designed by (a) Boeing [200], and (b) Quantum-Systems Co [201].

Fig. 67. Views of tilt-wing drones designed by (a) Dickeson et al. [202], and (b) Ostermann et al. [203].

Cetinsoy et al. in 2012, attempted to model, design, and control a
quad tilt-wing UAV. They used four tilt-wing and rotors in the quadrotor
configuration for their design, which turns into a twin fixed-wing in the
cruise phase [204]. A view of this quad tilt-wing drone is shown in
Fig. 68.
Besides researchers, private sectors also designed and manufactured
different types of tilt-wing UASs. For example, Acuity Technologies
company designed and manufactured a tilt-wing UAS, called AT-10, that
only a part of the wing is tilted to reduce disturbance and drag effects
(see Fig. 69(a)) [205]. Some examples have also been developed using
more than four rotors but in the fixed-wing configuration, such as
NASA’s tilt-wings, which uses ten electric rotors on tilting wings [21].
With these rotors mounted on a 3 m wingspan, the drone can carry up to
28 kg payload and have a vertical landing and takeoff (see Fig. 69(b))
[206].
A special type of tilt-wing drone shown in Fig. 70 has been developed
by Low et al. in 2017, by integrating a tailless flying wing configuration
with a single-axis rotor [207]. In this UAS, the wing acts as a propeller in
the vertical takeoff phase and generates lift force through rotation, such
as the wing-rotor, as previously mentioned. In the cruise phase, the wing
is fixed, and the drone continues to fly like a fixed-wing UAS. In this
phase, the rotors will be responsible for generating thrust and the

needed torque to control the drone [207].
As indicated in Fig. 71, Iridium Dynamics has designed a drone
called Halo 240-E Inspection that uses rotary wings. In the vertical
takeoff phase, these wings are responsible for generating vertical thrust,
such as the rotary mono-rotors. In this phase, the entire body rotates
with the wings, and the drone’s tail is also used as a propeller. After the
transition phase, the wing and tail become fixed and will provide the lift
force like fixed-wings [208].
4.1.2.2.1. Challenges and Benefits. Compared with the tilt-rotors,
tilt-wing UASs generally have a more sophisticated and complicated
design in on-board components such as tilting drive train. Also, in lowspeed operation, like hover, takeoff, and landing, the wings of a tilt-wing
UAS need to be directed upward, making them more vulnerable to
crosswind. Therefore, developing a tilt-wing UAS requires additional
effort in designing control mechanisms to handle the attitude stabili­
zation [21]. These UASs can perform vertical flight similar to
rotary-wings and fly with high speed for long-duration missions like
fixed-wing UASs [5].
4.2. Non-tilt hybrid UASs
In this set, although the UAS has a hybrid configuration but it does

Fig. 68. Tilt-wing drone developed by Cetinsoy et al. [204].
27

Progress in Aerospace Sciences 121 (2020) 100694

S. Darvishpoor et al.

Fig. 69. Tilt-wing drones designed by (a) Acuity Technologies company [205] and (b) NASA [206].

Fig. 70. View of tilt-wing drone developed by Low et al. [207].

Fig. 71. Rotorcraft developed by Iridium Dynamics [208].

not need rotation and transition phase to be converted from VTOL to
HTOL. There are two types of non-tilt hybrid UASs, including dual sys­
tems and rotary wings, that are discussed below.

transition phase compared to tilt-wings or tilt-rotors, the unnecessary
use of a system in each phase imposes an extra burden on the system and
does not allow the designer to utilize all the capacity of the motors.
These UASs are not very popular among designers despite the simplicity
and feasibility of using different wing designs, and not many of them
have been developed. In Fig. 72, the structure of a typical dual system
drone is shown [209].
One of the most old-fashioned examples of drones with dual systems
was developed in 2000 by Sikorsky Dragon. This UAS uses two ducted
propellers for vertical flight and another motor with a duct for the cruise
flight. The control surfaces are also embedded in the wing and help to

4.2.1. Dual system
These drones have the characteristics of the HTOL and VTOL drones
simultaneously. In dual systems, during each phase, one system is acti­
vated, and the other is deactivated. A class of drones that uses dual fuel is
also called dual systems, which should not be confused with this type of
UASs. Generally, this UAS is composed of a combination of multirotor
and fixed-wing configurations. Although they do not have a complex
28

S. Darvishpoor et al.

Progress in Aerospace Sciences 121 (2020) 100694

Fig. 72. Structure of a typical dual system drone [209].

control the drone [84]. In Fig. 73, views of a hybrid drone with dual
systems developed by Sikorsky Dragon is shown.
An example, called HADA, has also been developed through
combining helicopter and fixed-wing configurations that act as a heli­
copter in the takeoff mode and like a fixed-wing in the cruise. In this
phase, the motor embedded in the drone tail is responsible for thrust
generation (see Fig. 74) [211].
Similar concepts have been developed, inspired by the quadrotor
configuration with a fixed rotor for the takeoff phase. For example,
ArcturusUAV has built a commercial prototype of this drone (see Fig. 75
(a)) [212]. Aletky has also proposed a similar design using coaxial
motors with a V-shape wing combination (see Fig. 75(b)) [213]. Ex­
amples have also been developed with other designs of wing and tail.
The Airborne company has also designed a dual system drone
combining a fixed-wing and bi-rotor configurations. In this UAS, the
vertical flight is performed as a bi-rotor, and the cruise is fixed-wing (see
Fig. 76) [214].

Fig. 74. HADA dual system aircraft [186].

mounting. Furthermore, this configuration is not mass-efficient because
the VTOL rotors are not involved in cruise flight. But their simple
structure and dynamics make the control design easy. Also, unlike tilthybrid drones, there is no transition mode.

4.2.1.1. Challenges and benefits. In dual systems, the tilting mechanism
is not a part of the drone, so dual systems, compared with tilt-hybrid
UASs, have simplified mechanical design and enhanced reliability.
However, during cruise flight, the multiple non-operational rotors for
vertical lift generation cause extra aerodynamic drag due to their fixed

4.2.2. Rotary-wing
In a group of UASs with dual systems, the wing is involved in both the
vertical and horizontal flight modes. In other words, the wing provides

Fig. 73. Hybrid drone with dual systems developed by Sikorsky [84,210].
29

S. Darvishpoor et al.

Progress in Aerospace Sciences 121 (2020) 100694

Fig. 75. Dual system drones developed by (a) ArcturusUAV [212], and (b) Aletky [213].

5. Bio-based UASs
The drones in this category are somehow linked to living avians or
insects, either directly inspired by birds and insects and mimic their
flight mechanism or that living species form a part of their flight
mechanism. Accordingly, this category is divided into two classes, bioinspired and bio in the loop.
5.1. Bio-inspired UASs
Bio-inspired drones include those designed based on nature or the
ones that mimic the flight of living birds. As discussed above, from this
classification, drones that are inspired by the maple seed known as
Samara, have been considered as wing-rotor VTOLs. These bio-inspired
drones are classified as flapping-wing and non-flapping-wing drones.

Fig. 76. The dual system UAS combines the capabilities of an aircraft and
helicopter to provide a wide range of missions, developed by Airborne [214].

5.1.1. Flapping-wing drones
The flapping-wing drone category has been very popular over the
past ten years among micro-drones designers [216–220]. This category
of UAS uses flapping motion to generate the required aerodynamic
forces, such as lift and thrust, instead of the conventional methods.
Flapping wings generally have a twist on their wing in addition to
transitional movement. These drones are often built in two types,
namely twisting-wing and fixed-wing (non-twisting), where
twisting-wings are more efficient and complex. Flapping wing drones
are designed in three classes, namely, Pico, Nano, and Micro Air Vehicles
(PAV, NAV, and MAV). Flapping wing PAVs are inspired by insects,
MAVs are inspired by birds, and NAV flapping wings are inspired by
species between very small birds and huge insects, such as humming­
birds and dragonflies [5,220]. In Fig. 79, views of three classes of
flapping-wings are shown. Flapping-wing drones also can be designed
and fabricated in three different configurations, namely, monoplane,
biplane, and tandem [5,221].
Flapping-wing drones are able to fly by applying the aerodynamic
forces resulting from the oscillatory motion of wings coupled with
twisting. Aerodynamic analysis of these drones has indicated that flap­
ping motion is the most efficient method in generating aerodynamic

the required lift in the takeoff phase as a rotor and as a fixed-wing in the
cruise phase. This group of drones is called rotary-wings. In cruise mode,
the wing is fixed, and the rotation mechanism of the wing is deactivated.
For this reason, they are classified in the hybrid category, although the
wing participates differently in both phases. In Fig. 77, views of a rotarywing are indicated [215].
As indicated in Fig. 78, Boeing has also developed an example of this
type of drone called the X-50. However, the rotary-wing UASs have
complex dynamical modeling and aerodynamics due to their instability
in transition mode [5,21].
4.2.2.1. Challenges and benefits. Rotary-wing UASs have been studied in
a few kinds of research, and most of them have been stopped. It should
be noted that none of the above-mentioned projects have succeeded in
completing the transition flight. The main reason for this is that the
unique rotary-wing feature poses critical challenges to a qualified so­
lution to balance the design complexities in aerodynamics and
mechanics.

Fig. 77. Views of NLR The stop-rotor rotary-wing drone [215].
30

S. Darvishpoor et al.

Progress in Aerospace Sciences 121 (2020) 100694

Fig. 78. Views of Boeing X50 Dragonfly rotary-wing drone [5,21].

Fig. 79. Views of (a) MAV [222], (b) NAV [223], and (c) PAV flapping-wing drones [224].

forces at the low Reynolds numbers [5,225]. Generally, flapping-wing
drones have light and flexible wings, as seen in avians and insects,
which shows that the weight and flexibility of wings are important for
their flight stability and aerodynamic proficiency [5]. This flexibility of
the wing creates the twist-angle that provides the necessary angle of
attack to generate sufficient lift during flapping [5,218]. In Fig. 80,
different insects’ wings are shown that can be inspired for wing shapes of
flapping-wing drones [226].
There are plenty of actuation mechanisms that have been designed
for flapping-wings, which are dependent on the type and class of these
bio-inspired drones [227]. These actuation mechanisms are 4-bar, 5-bar,
and 6-bar mechanisms. For example, for flapping wings at MAV class, a
variety of actuators have been applied, and most of them are similar to
the commercial flapping-wings, such as Slowhawk2 [228], Kinkade
[229], and Kestrel [230]. Delfly NAV has been powered by a DC electric
motor coupled to a gearbox and linkage mechanism using conventional
pin joints (see Fig. 81(a)) [231,232]. At this scale, Keennon et al. have
designed and fabricated a flapping wing NAV like a hummingbird,
which is capable of flying in hover mode (see Fig. 81(b)) [223]. This
flapping-wing NAV applies an actuation mechanism composed of strings
and rollers, while still using a geared down motor to generate power at
the right frequency [223].
Different types of flapping-wing drones have been designed by

researchers and private sectors [233]. Researchers at the Delft Univer­
sity of Technology have designed and prototyped models based on insect
flight but with using a tail, which they called them DelflyI and DelflyII
(see Fig. 82(a)) [231,232]. Festo company has also developed a penguin,
seagull, dragonfly, butterfly, and bat-inspired flapping-wing drones,
which are shown in Fig. 82(b–f) [234].
There is also a different version of flapping-wing drones developed
by Jones and Platzer, which uses a hybrid flapping-fixed-wing design. In
this drone, the flapping-wing is generating thrust and the fixed-wing
producing the necessary lift [235]. In Fig. 83, a view of the
flapping-fixed-wing drone developed by Platzer et al. is indicated [236].
Some of the other flapping-wings come with four and more wings in
various configurations such as tandem or perpendicular and cross (Xwing) (see Fig. 84 and 85) [237].
A comprehensive study was conducted on the aerodynamics of the
flapping-wings by Shyy et al. [226]. They also worked on the aero­
dynamics of the low Reynolds number flyers like birds, bats, insects and
flapping-wing MAVs [238]. In 2010, Shyy et al. reviewed the recent
progress in flapping-wing aerodynamics and aeroelasticity [239].
Orlowski and Girard, in 2012, reviewed the researches on the dynamics,
stability and control analysis of flapping-wing micro air vehicles [240].
In 2019, Phan and Park studied the progress in the bio-inspired flap­
ping-wing drones, including their aerodynamics, mechanism, modeling

Fig. 80. Views of insects’ wing shape [226].
31

S. Darvishpoor et al.

Progress in Aerospace Sciences 121 (2020) 100694

Fig. 81. Views of (a) Delfly flapping-wing [232], (b) hummingbird-inspired NAV, and (c) flapping-wing mechanism for hummingbird-inspired NAV [223].

Fig. 82. Views of (a) DelflyII flapping-wing [232], and Festo (b) penguin-inspired, (c) seagull-inspired, (d) dragonfly-inspired, (e) butterfly-inspired, and (f)
bat-inspired flapping-wing [234].

wing UASs, in comparison with fixed-wing and multirotors drones, have
merits and challenges. Due to the Reynolds number effects, micro air
vehicles and conventional manned air vehicles have different aero­
dynamic characteristics such as lift, drag and thrust. Studies have shown
that in low Reynolds number, fixed-wing drones have a lower efficiency
than flapping-wings. However, flapping-wings have lower weight, can
fly at low speeds, and are sensitive to wind force [239]. Insect-size
flapping-wings have the ability to hover and a quick transition to for­
ward flight. These characteristics make flapping-wing an ideal config­
uration for search and rescue, law enforcement, and military missions.
Flapping-wings have an extremely limited payload capacity. There­
fore, their control calculations’ processing power needs to be as low as
possible [240]. These UASs, due to their small size, hovering capability,
high maneuverability at low speeds, and small acoustic signature, are
one of the best solutions for indoor missions. Moreover, they are more
efficient in power requirements at low speeds than either fixed-wing or
multirotor UASs [241].
As noted before, there are two types of flapping-wing UASs; bird-like
and insect-like flapping-wings. There are significant differences between
the flight mechanisms of a bird and an insect. Birds apply their tail as a
control surface, while insects do not have a tail and mainly rely on their
wings to produce control forces by actively modifying wing kinematics

Fig. 83. View of flapping-fixed-wing drone developed by Platzer et al. [236].

and control [237].
5.1.1.1. Challenges and benefits. The designs of fixed-wing drones
encounter more fundamental challenges in flight control and lift gen­
eration as their sizes become smaller than a few centimeters. Flapping-

Fig. 84. Different configurations of wings in flapping-wing drones; (a) two-wing, (b) tandem, (c) perpendicular, (d) two-pair, (e) four-pair, and (f) eight-pair [237].
32

S. Darvishpoor et al.

Progress in Aerospace Sciences 121 (2020) 100694

Fig. 85. Views of flapping-wing drones, (a) TechJect Dragonfly and (b) Delfly Nimble [237].

during flapping motion. In addition, usually, the birds are not capable of
hover flight while most of the insects are. Therefore, the insect-inspired
drones may have more advantages, but their design is more challenging
because of the lack of stabilizing tail, smaller size, and manufacturing
processes [237].

and insects. Some of the activities have focused on practicing and
training birds for flight [5]. Some of the activities have also been done
on direct control of birds. This is done by sending control signals to the
brain, neural network, or muscle and has already been tested on some
insects and birds [5]. The mechanism for motion of the musculoskeletal
system is based on the transmission of commands by the nerves to the
muscles. These include a series of low-voltage electronic signals that can
be generated by external devices and sent to the muscle, nervous system,
or brain. The necessary electrodes are inserted into the body of the bird
or insect by surgery and assume control of the bird organs [5]. In the
training method, the bird is trained on how to fly. It can be controlled by
finding its origin or destination or by using actuators that do not require
surgery, for example, stimulating bird or insect by light, sound, or
impact. For example, in 2009, Bozkurt et al. have attempted to control a
witch moth using balloons [242].
In this type of UASs, energy consumption is very low, and important
phases of the flight, including detection and obstacles avoidance, can be
performed by living birds. Nevertheless, the challenges facing such biodrone include medical complexities, surgeries, and other impediments,
such as violations of animal rights and environmental laws, along with
the possibility of the bird being lost in the process of flight or disrupting
the mission by the living organ. Some few researches have been done on
insects; however, less research has been performed on birds and flying
insects due to their complexity. For example, in various studies, Sato
et al. have attempted to study how to control insects and several flying
insects [243–246]. Researchers at Shandong University, China, are also
working on controlling pigeons using brain signals [247]. In Fig. 87
(a)-87(c), views of controlled flying insects and birds are demonstrated.
Before reviewing the drones’ applications, it would be helpful to
review the different configurations of the UASs, which were discussed in
this paper. Fig. 88 illustrates a view of all categories of UASs.

5.1.2. Non-flapping-wing drones
In the category of non-flapping-wings, the only example is the
jellyfish-inspired UAS designed by the Festo company. This drone is
designed based on the mechanism of the jellyfish in the water to
generate thrust by moving its arms for flying. The jellyfish-inspired UAS
consists of a light gas-filled balloon, like helium, with several mechan­
ical arms at the bottom. An oblique gear is mounted in the center of the
drone. First, the force is transmitted to the oblique gear and then to a
row of eight gears. These gears provide the required power by the eight
axles. Each of them activates a crank, which in turn causes one of the
robot’s eight arms to move. According to the creators, the antenna
structure is derived from the functional anatomy of the fish fin.
Together, these arms produce a forward motion similar to that of jel­
lyfish. The control of this flying object is affected by moving the center of
gravity. For this purpose, a pendulum that can move in two directions
has been considered. The pendulum is located in the upper part of the
robot, making it fit for the movement (motion). The center of mass of the
robot, as well as the robot itself, move along the pendulum. The robot
moves in any spatial direction using a peristaltic motion. This bioinspired drone is lightweight, relatively quiet, and safe and can hover
and fly vertically. Alongside these benefits, it has a complex flight
mechanism. Fig. 86 shows this drone discussed above [5,234].
5.2. Bio in the loop (cyborg)
In this category of UASs, part of the flight mechanism consists of
living things. Most efforts in this area focus on controlling living birds

Fig. 86. Views of Jellyfish-inspired UAS developed by Festo [234].
33

S. Darvishpoor et al.

Progress in Aerospace Sciences 121 (2020) 100694

Fig. 87. Views (a) remotely-controlled flying insects [246], (b) surgery of a beetle to embed control actuators [246–248], and (c) brain-controlled pigeon of
Shandong University [247].

6. Applications and capabilities of different UAS configurations

categories are considered as the lowest and highest bound of each
characteristic and other categories are ranked between them with Low,
Medium and High designations. For example, the highest level in
structural simplicity is considered to be a fixed-wing UAS, while the
lowest level for structural simplicity is taken as flapping-wings and he­
licopters. All other categories would then fall between these two (lowest
and highest) categories. The highest level in a variety of SOE belongs to
fixed-wing UASs, where they can fly using solar, electrical, chemical,
and hybrid fuels. On the other hand, there are flapping-wing drones that
normally use electrical power only or paragliders, which typically use
chemical energy. With regard to scalability, the highest level is assigned
to fixed-wing UASs again. As mentioned before, they are constructed in
NAV, MAV, μUAV and UAV configurations. Also, flapping-wing UAVs
can be of PAV, NAV, MAV, and μUAV types, so both of these categories
can be considered the highest in scalability. The paragliders, which can
be found only in UAV size, are considered the lowest in scalability. The
highest level in operational altitude belongs to lighter than air and fixedwing UASs, which can fly at altitudes as high as 25 km, and the lowest

In this section, applications of UASs and their requirements are dis­
cussed in order to underscore which configuration is best suited for a
particular application.
6.1. UAS’s specifications
In order to demonstrate the applications of the UASs, it is necessary
to examine their specifications. Each application requires its own spec­
ifications. Typical specifications which determine the fitness of a UAV
for a specific application include; structural simplicity, scalability,
ability to utilize different Sources Of Energy (SOE) such as solar, elec­
trical, chemical and hybrid energies, operational altitude and range,
endurance, cruise speed, ability to hover, maneuverability and cargocarrying capacity.
Table 2 provides a qualitative comparison of the specifications
described above for different types of UASs. In each section, two

Fig. 88. Different categories of UASs.
34

S. Darvishpoor et al.

Progress in Aerospace Sciences 121 (2020) 100694

Table 2
Qualitative comparison of various UASs.
Category

Sub-Category

Structure
Simplicity

Variety
of SOE

Scalability

Max
Altitude

Max
Range

Endurance

Cruise
Speed

Need for
Runway

Hover
Flight

Maneuverability

Cargo
Capacity

HTOL

Fixed-wing
Morphing
wing
Magnuseffect
Paraglider
Ornicopter
Thrust
vectoring
MMC
Ducted-fan
Bi-rotor
Tri-rotor
Quadrotor
Pentarotor
and higher
Coandaeffect
Lighter than
air
Helicopter
Wing-rotor
Cyclocopter
Tilt-rotor
Tilt-wing
Tilt-body
Dual systems
Rotary-wing
Flappingwing
Nonflappingwing
Bio in the
loop

H
L

H
H

H
H

H
H

H
H

H
H

H
H

Y
Y

N
N

M
M

H
H

L

H

M

H

H

H

H

Y

N

M

H

M
L
M

L
M
M

L
M
M

M
L
L

H
M
L

H
M
L

L
L
L

Y
N
N

N
Y
Y

L
M
H

H
L
L

L
M
H
H
H
H

L
M
M
M
M
M

M
M
M
M
M
M

L
L
L
L
L
L

L
L
L
L
L
L

L
L
L
L
L
L

L
L
L
L
L
L

N
N
N
N
N
N

Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y

H
M
H
H
H
M

L
L
L
L
L
L

M

M

M

L

L

L

L

N

Y

M

L

M

H

L

H

M

M

M

N

Y

M

H

L
M
L
M
M
M
M
M
L

M
M
M
H
H
H
H
M
L

H
M
M
M
M
M
M
M
H

M
M
L
H
H
H
H
M
L

M
M
L
H
H
H
H
H
L

M
M
L
H
H
H
H
H
L

M
L
L
H
H
H
H
H
L

N
N
N
N
N
N
N
N
N

Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y

L
M
M
M
M
M
M
M
M

M
L
L
H
H
H
H
H
L

L

L

M

L

L

L

L

N

Y

M

L

L

L

–

L

L

L

L

–

–

–

L

VTOL

Monorotor

Multirotors

Others

Hybrid

Bio-Based

level belongs to flapping-wing UASs, which normally fly at elevations
below 1 km [5].
In the same manner, different categories of UASs can be organized
with respect to other specifications, qualitatively. The results are sum­
marized in Table 2, where H, L, M, Y, and N denote high, low, medium,
yes and no, respectively. It should be noted that bio in the loop UASs
cannot be evaluated with regard to specifications like scalability. In that
case, a ‘-‘ designation appears in the table.
Each of the sub-categories in categories can be compared relatively
by the same method. Fig. 89 illustrates a qualitative comparison be­
tween the sub-categories of each category based on Table 2. It has been
tried to show each configuration’s advantages compared to other con­
figurations of its own type, so the charts do not show the exact values of
specifications.
The following sections review the applications of UASs and their
required specifications. The primary objective is to determine the most
suitable configuration for a given application.

rescue, and multimedia and motion picture industries. They are also
applied in all types of aerial surveillance, including policing,
counter-terrorism operations, large scale public outdoor events, impor­
tant objects and VIP security, ground and sea traffic, and environmental
pollution control and monitoring. Telecommunications, crop moni­
toring, animal surveillance, fisheries protection, mineral exploration,
ground mapping and photography, meteorological observation, pipeline
and power line inspection, freight carrying, mailing and delivery, etc.,
are few other areas of applications of UASs.
A comprehensive classification of the drone’s applications is pre­
sented by Hassanalian and Abdelkefi, which pairs the above-mentioned
applications and classifications [5] (see Fig. 90). Shakhatreh et al. have
classified applications of drones into search and rescue, remote sensing,
construction and inspection, precision agriculture, delivery of goods,
real-time monitoring of road traffic, surveillance and wireless coverage
[249].
Due to the similarity in the requirements and the nature of missions,
the applications of UASs are assessed in terms of the following cate­
gories; Inspection, Survey and Mapping, Agriculture and Environment
research, Search and Rescue (SAR) Missions, Mailing and Delivery,
Military Missions, Marine and Underwater Missions, Space Missions and
Miscellaneous Applications (see Fig. 91).

6.2. UAS’s applications and required specifications
UASs have applications in a wide range of civilian and military op­
erations, where they perform both outdoor and indoor tasks in diverse
environments extending from underwater (amphibious UASs) to spacerelated missions. They can be equipped with various sensors and cam­
eras to perform surveillance, reconnaissance, research, operational and
intelligence gathering assignments [5]. The applications of UASs can be
classified in different ways. It can be based on the type of the mission
(civilian or military), type of flight zone (indoor and outdoor) and
environment (underwater, on the water, ground, air, space) [5].
Nowadays, besides military applications, they are routinely employed in
fire-fighting activities, disaster assessment and mitigation, search and

6.2.1. Inspection, survey and mapping
Drones are a valuable tool for data collection in a variety of appli­
cations, such as surveillance, inspections, mapping, and 3D modeling.
UASs are considered a low-cost device compared to classical manned
aerial photography. New applications in the short and close-range
domain are introduced regularly by researchers [250]. For example,
rotary and fixed-wing drones are able to perform photogrammetric data
acquisition with different types of cameras. Besides typical
35

S. Darvishpoor et al.

Progress in Aerospace Sciences 121 (2020) 100694

Fig. 89. Qualitative comparison of each category’s specifications.

photogrammetric workflows, drones can create contours, 3D digital
surfaces or terrain models, textured 3D models, and vector information
for a vast area [250]. Nex and Remondino, in 2014, reviewed the state of
the art of UAS for geomatics applications, considering different UASs
platforms, applications, and case studies. They also showed the latest
developments in UAS image processing [250].
The main required specifications of drones for mapping based on Nex
and Remondino are acceptable payload capacity, wind resistance,
autonomous flight, high endurance and portability [250]. Mapping is
one of the popular applications in archeology, agriculture, forestry, and
architectural and environmental areas. These requirements are common

for inspection and survey missions. Thus, the drones designed for
mapping missions are also usable for inspections and survey missions.
The sheer number of drones for these types of missions are broad.
Some commercial UASs use fixed-wing configurations, mainly flying
wing platform with manual launch capability. For example, South Group
has developed a hand launch flying wing UAS, known as SKYCRUISER
A22, for surveying and mapping missions with about 1-h endurance and
up to 80 km flight range [251]. Also, Unmanned System Group has
developed a flying wing with twin wing-mounted vertical tails, called
Supercam S100, which is designed for aerial surveillance in a wide range
of weather conditions and search protocols, including complicated land
36

S. Darvishpoor et al.

Progress in Aerospace Sciences 121 (2020) 100694

Fig. 90. The classification of drones’ applications presented by Hassanalian and Abdelkefi [5].

relief and water’s surface [252]. Moreover, there is a similar drone,
eBee, developed by SenseFly Company, which uses a flying wing
configuration and manual launch system and is designed for
agriculture-related missions. This drone has about 1-h endurance and
flies at 400 ft above ground level, which is a high operational altitude
compared to small multirotors [253]. A solar-powered version of these
UASs has been developed by UAV Instruments Spain Company, called
CIES for photogrammetry, remote detection, recognition and activities
involving precision agriculture [254]. EasyMapUAV has developed a
flying wing with two rotors and tree wing-mounted vertical tails (Mas­
terfly) for photogrammetric missions and reconnaissance missions [9].
In Fig. 92, views of the flying wing UASs for inspection, survey and
mapping are shown.

There are also some versions of classical fixed-wing UASs for these
types of missions. For example, Satlab has introduced a fixed-wing UAS
(SLA-1) with twin tail boom empennage for mapping and survey mis­
sions [256]. Topcon Company has also introduced a typical fixed-wing
UAS for high accuracy aerial mapping and modeling [257]. Aeromao
developed a fixed-wing drone with a V-shape tail and parachute landing
for mapping, surveying, 3D modeling, photogrammetry, agriculture,
mining and construction missions [258]. Fig. 93 depicts these three
fixed-wing UASs.
Lighter than air UASs are also one of the configurations that are
applicable to these types of missions. For example, Skyshot Helikite
developed by Allsopp Helikites Ltd is a semi-kite balloon that is used in
photogrammetry, surveying and mapping missions. This balloon resists

Fig. 91. Classification of UASs’ applications.
37

S. Darvishpoor et al.

Progress in Aerospace Sciences 121 (2020) 100694

Fig. 92. Views of flying wing UASs for inspection, survey and mapping; (a) SKYCRUISER A22 [251], (b) Supercam S100 [252], (c) eBee SQ [253], (d) MasterFly
[255], and (e) CIES 2.2 [254].

Fig. 93. Pictures of fixed-wing UASs for inspection, survey and mapping (a) SLA-1 [256], (b) SiRIUS Pro [257], and (c) Aeromapper [258].

wind gusts of up to 35 mph speed [259] (see Fig. 94(a)). Another
example is Halo, which is an unmanned balloon designed for photog­
raphy with up to 3 h of endurance (see Fig. 94(b)) [260].
One of the popular configurations for mapping, inspection and
surveying missions is multirotors. There are many commercial and
research drones of this kind in service today. For example, Satlab
Company has developed a heavy lift hexarotor photogrammetry UAS
[261]. Italdrone has made a heavy-lift long-endurance octarotor for
photogrammetry, filming, 3D reconstruction and inspection [262].
Ascending Technologies has prototyped an unconventional hexarotor
for photography, videography, inspection and survey missions [263].
ECA Group has designed and manufactured a mini co-axial Birotor UAS
propelled by a gasoline engine and dedicated to inspection and survey
missions, which has up to 2 h of endurance [264]. Applied Airborne has
built a coaxial tri-rotor for a survey and mapping [265]. Another
example is MetaVista Inc.‘s quad-rotor drone that runs on liquid

hydrogen and is powered by an 800W PEMFC provided by Intelligent
Energy (EI). MetaVista’s HYCOPTER drone achieved the Guinness
World Endurance record time of 10 h and 50 min on January 21, 2019
[266]. Fig. 95 depicts several multirotors UASs.
Helicopters have also been used as UASs to conduct survey and in­
spection missions. For example, Flying-Cam has developed an un­
manned electric helicopter equipped with a Lidar for photogrammetry
and Surveying [267]. Another unmanned helicopter designed by Alpha
Unmanned Systems uses a liquid fuel-powered engine, which increases
the endurance of the UAV up to 2 h and makes it suitable for conducting
civil, agriculture, mapping, surveillance and military missions [268].
Views of these two unmanned helicopters are shown in Fig. 96.
Another popular class of drones is the hybrid configuration that in­
cludes: tilt-rotor, tilt-body and dual systems. The main reason for the
popularity of hybrid drones is their high endurance, high payload ca­
pacity, as well as the ability to vertically take-off and land. There are

Fig. 94. Lighter than air UASs for photography, (a) Skyshot Helikite [259] and (b) Halo Balloon [260].
38

S. Darvishpoor et al.

Progress in Aerospace Sciences 121 (2020) 100694

Fig. 95. Several multi-rotors developed for mapping and inspection missions; (a) Italdrone BIGONE8HSE [262], (b) Satlab SLM-2 [261], (c) Ascending Technologies
AscTec Falcon 8 [263], (d) Applied Airborne X-Mapper PPK [265], (e) ECA Group IT180 5 TH U [264], and (f) MetaVista’s HYCOPTER drone [266].

Fig. 96. Unmanned helicopters developed for mapping and inspection missions; (a) Flying-Cam SARAH [267] and (b) SNIPER UAV Helicopter [268].

many examples of hybrid UASs which have been used for inspection,
survey and mapping missions. For example, Wingtra has used a tail sitter
tilt-body UAS for surveying, high-resolution mapping, mining and
agricultural operations. By using a hybrid configuration, they achieved a
performance ten times greater than multi-rotors [269]. Another example
is Atmos UAV’s Marlyn mapping drone that has a hybrid configuration
with a combination of a quadrotor and a fixed-wing UAS for mapping,
surveying, mining, environmental and agriculture activities [270].
4Frontrobotics has developed a ducted twin tilt-rotor UAS that is able to
carry a 5 kg payload for indoor and outdoor inspection, mapping and
aerial imaging [271]. Quantom Systems uses tilt-rotor UASs called Tron
and Trinity UASs for agriculture, 3D reconstruction and surveying,
which are described in the tilt-rotor section [272,273]. Moreover, Ger­
mandrones has designed a tilt-rotor UAS with a payload capability of
2 kg and flight endurance of 1-h, which is a fixed-wing UAS with a
V-shape tail in cruise flight mode [274]. Fig. 97 illustrates several hybrid
UASs discussed above.
Yet, another popular class of drones is dual system hybrid UASs.
There are many commercial UASs with a dual system configuration. For
example, V-TOL Aerospace Company has designed a dual system hybrid
UAS with a combination of a fixed-wing and a quadrotor configuration
for mapping missions [275]. A joint tail boom version of such a UAS has
been developed by South Company for 3D modeling and aerial mapping

Fig. 97. Hybrid UASs developed for mapping and inspection missions; (a)
Wingtraone [269], (b) Marlyn [270], (c) Navig8 [271], and (d) German drones
Songbird [274].

Fig. 98. Dual system hybrid UASs for mapping and inspection missions; (a) V-TOL Aerospace Goshawk Hybrid [275], (b) South Skycruiser MF2500 [276], (c)
DeltaQuad Pro [277], and (d) HAMR’s unconventional dual system hybrid UAV [278].
39

S. Darvishpoor et al.

Progress in Aerospace Sciences 121 (2020) 100694

Fig. 99. Applications of multi-rotors in environmental protection [282–284].

Fig. 100. UASs developed for tasks related to environmental protection; (a) flying wing UAS used by Linchant et al. to count elephants [287], (b) fixed-wing UAS
used by Van Andel et al. [290] (c), quadrotor developed by Pirotta et al. [286], and (d) quadrotor used by Harvey et al. for georeference imagery [288].

Fig. 101. Several taxidermy drones (a) OstrichCopter [291], (b) Robosparrow [292], and (c) PigeonBot [293].

[276]. A tail-less version has been built by DeltaQuad Company for
autonomous mapping, geospatial, agriculture and forestry operations
[277]. Another unconventional dual system hybrid UAS has been made
by HAMR Company, which uses six rotors for the VTOL phase and a
fuel-powered engine for horizontal cruise flight. Using this configura­
tion, HMAR UAS can carry up to 7l lbs of payload for about 3.5 h, which
makes it suitable for 3D modeling, mapping and surveying activities
[278]. Fig. 98 depicts dual system hybrid UASs for mapping and in­
spection applications.

deserts. UASs are used for investigation and monitoring occurrences of
natural disasters like forest fires, avalanches, etc. [279]. For example,
Oliveira-da-Costa et al. have studied the effectiveness of drones in
detecting Amazon dolphins. In their study, they showed that compared
to visual surveys, the use of aerial drones could provide a more reliable,
cost-effective and accurate estimate of Amazon river dolphin pop­
ulations [280]. Colefax et al. in 2019, have also worked on the reliability
of marine faunal detection in drone-based monitoring. Based on their
study, drones provide an effective tool for monitoring large marine
fauna off coastal beaches [281]. Fig. 99 shows the applications of
multi-rotors in environmental protection activities.
The most popular configurations in environmental protection are
fixed-wing and quadrotor drones. Hartman et al. used quadrotors to
study the relationship between sociality and position in a group of male
Risso’s Dolphins (Grampus griseus) [285]. Pirotta et al. developed an

6.2.2. Agriculture and environment research
Environmental missions are summed up in surveying and inspection.
Most of the UASs developed for environmental protection are equipped
with cameras and enable scientists to study, monitor and track wildlife
and the effect of climate change in the national parks, forests, oceans and
40

S. Darvishpoor et al.

Progress in Aerospace Sciences 121 (2020) 100694

Fig. 102. Views of agriculture drones [297–302].

300–1000 g), and camera-carrying ability [296]. The common config­
uration in these types of applications are multi-rotors and fixed-wing
UASs, but there are some versions of helicopter configuration, as well.
Fig. 102 depicts drones developed for agriculture usage.

economical custom-built quadrotor for assessing Whale health [286]. A
similar study was conducted by Linchant et al. who applied a fixed-wing
flying wing drone to count the elephant populations [287]. Harvey et al.
utilized a quadrotor equipped with an infrared camera to provide
high-resolution georeferenced imagery of the Waikite geothermal area
in New Zealand [288]. Gemert et al. introduced nature conservation
quadrotor drones for automatic localization and counting of animal
populations. In their study, they used automatic object recognition
techniques to accomplish their objectives [289]. Van Andel et al. have
also used a typical fixed-wing drone for locating Chimpanzee nests and
identifying fruiting trees [290]. Fig. 100 depicts drones utilized for
environmental protection programs.
In some cases, the dead or taxidermied bodies of animals are used in
the structure of the UAVs to track the animal’s behavior. In some cases,
this was to calm animals down and prevent them from being frightened.
It also has some military applications such as espionage. These types of
bio-drones have been used in many projects. Jansen used the taxidermy
of animals as flying platforms for drones [291]. In his works, the dead
bodies of animals, such as cat, rat, and ostrich, were used as the structure
of the quadrotor drones [291]. In 2013, Anderson et al. applied a taxi­
dermized dead bird animated by off-the-shelf robotics to study the
behavior of the swamp sparrow species [292]. In 2020, Chang et al.
developed a biohybrid morphing wing called PigeonBot with real
feathers of pigeon to understand the underlying design principles [293].
Fig. 101 provides several of the bio-drones discussed above.
UASs are also applicable in agriculture, specifically in irrigation and
spraying, soil and field analysis, planting, crop monitoring and health
assessment [294]. Applications of drones in precision agriculture have
been reviewed by Mogili and Deepak [295]. Ahirwal et al. also con­
ducted a study in reviewing the implementation of drones in agriculture
[294]. Marinello et al. conducted a technical analysis of UASs in agri­
cultural operations. In that study, they used technical specification
sheets of over 250 commercially available models. Based on their
research, the main requirements of UASs for agriculture are medium
endurance (about 30–45 min), medium payload capacity (about

6.2.3. Search and rescue (SAR) missions
Rapid response is essential to any search and rescue mission; that is
why the UASs are more suited than manned aerial vehicles to this kind of
mission [5]. Drones are agile and fast and can be controlled autono­
mously to perform missions that are hard for human operators to
execute [303]. Search and rescue operations can take advantage of UASs
to survey the environment and collect evidence [303]. In search and
rescue missions, there are sets of constraints, such as the limited time to
perform the mission, potential loss of human lives, and unfriendly
operational environments, e.g., disaster scenes, forests, etc. [303]. In
recent years, so many designs and concepts have been introduced for
search and rescue UAS, including their control, path planning, swarm
scenarios and imaging and human identification algorithms as well as
their configurations. UAS potentially can be used in various natural and
man-made disasters and emergencies like storms, floods, droughts,
earthquakes, volcanic eruptions, fires and accidents.
There are four types of search and rescue missions performed by
drones, which are classified based on their environment, including
wilderness, maritime, combat, and urban [304]. In the wilderness search
and rescue missions, the goal is often to find lost persons or objects. In
these kinds of missions, medical drones can help by providing urgent
medical care at the hard to reach areas and by transporting injured
patients quickly [304]. Drones with vertical takeoff and landing capa­
bility can be appropriate for these types of missions. In maritime search
and rescue missions, the main objective is to find people lost at sea. In
the maritime missions, there are challenges, such as unstable weather
conditions, limited fuel or battery capacity, and uncertainty and
dynamicity of survivor locations, which affect the success of these
missions [304]. Drones in combat and urban search and rescue missions
have similar objectives to the previous ones but in different

Fig. 103. Fixed-wing search and rescue UASs; (a) UAV designed by Erdos et al. [305] and (b) flying wing developed by Goodrich et al. [306].
41

S. Darvishpoor et al.

Progress in Aerospace Sciences 121 (2020) 100694

Fig. 104. Several multirotor UASs developed for SAR missions; (a) quadrotor developed by Tomic et al. [307], (b) different multirotors used by Scherer et al. [308],
and (c) quadrotor developed by Silvagni [309].

environments [304]. Some projects in SAR missions have been carried
out using fixed-wing UASs. For example, Erdos et al. have introduced a
typical fixed-wing design for search and rescue missions [305]. Good­
rich et al. used a flying wing UAS for wilderness search and rescue
missions [306]. Fig. 103 gives views of fixed-wing search and rescue
UASs described above.
Another configuration that has been used widely in SAR missions is
multirotor, specifically quadrotor configuration. Tomic et al. have
developed a fully autonomous quadrotor for indoor and outdoor urban
search and rescue [307]. Another similar work is done by Scherer et al.
using an autonomous Multi-UAV system, including multiple multi-rotors
for conducting SAR missions [308]. Silvagni et al. developed a quadrotor
for search and rescue operations in mountain avalanche events [309].
Fig. 104 depicts several multirotor UASs developed for SAR specific
missions.
Furthermore, Wang et al. have developed a coaxial mono-rotor for
the SAR application aimed at retrieving physical information about the
trapped environment and providing accurate location information of the
victims (see Fig. 105) [310].
Several multirotor drones have been designed and built by the RTS
group for Marine SAR (MSAR) missions. Yeong et al. in 2015, reviewed
the literature on using UASs in marine search and rescue operations

Fig. 105. The mono-rotor developed by Wang et al. for SAR missions [310].

Fig. 106. Several MSAR multirotor drones [312–314].

Fig. 107. Views of unmanned helicopters; (a) helicopter developed by Qi et al. for SAR missions [315] and (b) emergency aid delivery helicopter developed by
UAVOS Company [316].
42

S. Darvishpoor et al.

Progress in Aerospace Sciences 121 (2020) 100694

Fig. 108. DroneAmerica’s fixed-wing firefighting UAS [317].

Fig. 109. Firefighting multirotor drones; (a) CGGAEM ducted-fan firefighter [320], (b) tri-rotor coaxial firefighter [322], (c) Aerones’s multirotor firefighter [321],
and (d) Walkera’s coaxial quadrotor [319].

Fig. 110. Fixed-wing delivery drones; (a) Zipline’s drone [323] and (b) Solent Transport’s drone [324].

[311]. Fig. 106 shows various MSAR multirotor drones.
Qi et al. have used an unmanned helicopter for post-earthquake
search and rescue. They tested its applications in detecting damaged
buildings and helping ground rescue teams in the aftermath of the
Lushan Ms 7.0 earthquake (see Fig. 107(a)) [315]. UAVOS Company has
also successfully completed tests of its gasoline-powered emergency aid
cargo delivery unmanned helicopter (see Fig. 107(b)) [316].
There are also some versions of firefighting UASs which are devel­
oped by different researchers and companies, such as Drone America’s
amphibious fixed-wing air tanker UAS, which can be used during fire

suppression missions [317]. Fig. 108 depicts DroneAmerica’s fixed-wing
UAS.
Multi-rotors are also a popular group of UASs for firefighting mis­
sions. Vyshnavi et al. developed an automatic CO2 extinguisher fire­
fighting quadrotor [318]. Walkera Company has built a coaxial
quadrotor for firefighting missions, which was equipped with a fire
extinguishing tank [319]. Chongqing Guofei General Aviation Equip­
ment Manufacturing (CGGAEM) Company has designed and manufac­
tured a ducted-fan firefighting quadrotor which has been tested in
various missions [320]. Aerones Company also has proposed a
43

S. Darvishpoor et al.

Progress in Aerospace Sciences 121 (2020) 100694

Fig. 111. Multirotors delivery drones; (a) Alibaba Tabao’s quadrotor [325], (b) SF-Express’s quadrotor [326], (c) DHL’s coaxial quadrotor [327], (d) FPS’s octo­
copter [328], and (e) Flirtey’s hexacopter [329].

Fig. 112. Unmanned delivery helicopters; (a) DDC helicopter [330] and (b) Yamaha’s helicopter [332].

Fig. 113. Views of hybrid delivery drones; (a) Google X’s dual system drone [333], (b)Wingcopter’s tilt-rotor drone [334], and (c) DDC’s dual system drone [336].

Fig. 114. Views of different fixed-wing military UASs, (a) V-tail [338], (b) T-tail [339], (c) delta wing [340], and (d) twin tail boom [341].

firefighting multirotor with sixteen coaxial rotors, which is powered by
wire and can carry a high-pressure water hose [321]. In Fig. 109, views
of these firefighting multirotor drones are illustrated.

Company has also developed a fixed-wing UAS with a twin tail boom,
which is able to carry 100 kg of medical supplies (COVID-19 related) to a
destination 1000 km away (see Fig. 110(b)) [324].
While Zipline and Solent Transport are using fixed-wing drones for
the delivery of goods, few others have opted for multirotor drones and
specially quadrotor configuration instead. For example, Alibaba [325]
and SF-Express [326] are using quadrotor drone configuration for their
delivery service. DHL mail service is also using a coaxial quadrotor for
shipping and delivery [327]. Other multi-rotors are also popular for
these types of missions. For example, two companies – FPS and Flirtey,
operate octocopters and hexacopters, respectively, for their delivery

6.2.4. Mailing and delivery
Drone delivery service is of interest to many companies all over the
world, including Amazon, Google and DHL. Fixed-wing UASs are also a
suitable configuration for mail and delivery service. Zipline company
has been using a fixed-wing UAS for delivering medical products during
the COVID-19 outbreak. The company tested delivery drones for
distributing test kits in Ghana (see Fig. 110(a)) [323]. Solent Transport
44

S. Darvishpoor et al.

Progress in Aerospace Sciences 121 (2020) 100694

Fig. 115. Views of armed military quadrotors, (a) Duke Robotics military quadrotor [342], (b) Turkey’s armed quadrotor [343], and (c) RPG-combined quad­
rotor [344].

Fig. 116. Views of unmanned military balloons [345].

Fig. 117. Views of hybrid military UASs; (a) dual system hybrid drone ALTI [346], (b) tail-sitter designed by Navy and Convair [347], (c) semi tail-sitter military
drone concept [348], and (d) dual system military UAS Bat-2 [349].

Fig. 118. Views of unmanned military helicopters; (a) Northrop Grumman MQ-8 Fire Scout [350], (b) Black Hornet PRS nano military unmanned helicopter [351],
and (c) CAMCOPTER S-100 unmanned military and civil helicopter [352].

service [328,329]. Fig. 111 shows multi-rotors used as delivery drones.
Helicopters are also popular configurations that have been employed
for delivering goods. Drone Delivery Canada (DDC) Company has
developed an unmanned helicopter with a cargo capacity of 180 kg and
an operational range of 200 km (see Fig. 112(a)) [330]. Yamaha has

developed a similar unmanned helicopter with a flight range of 90 km
(see Fig. 112(b)) [331].
Google is working on a dual system hybrid UAS for delivery service.
Google’s UAS is equipped with twelve rotors having an unconventional
configuration for vertical takeoff and landing, and two rotors on a wing
45

S. Darvishpoor et al.

Progress in Aerospace Sciences 121 (2020) 100694

some have morphing wing and flying wing configurations. Fig. 114
depicts several fixed-wing UASs developed for military-type operations.
Recently multi-rotor drones, specifically quadrotors, have been
employed in operational and combat missions alongside their applica­
tions in imaging. Some versions and products are weaponized by arming
quadrotors with light and heavy weapons (see Fig. 115) [342–344].
Balloons are also popular VTOL UASs for military missions. The
lighter-than-air systems are designed to provide semi-persistent ISR
(Intelligence, Surveillance and Reconnaissance) functionality at high
altitudes (up to 300 m). They can be used for border security and stra­
tegic asset surveillance using different sensors and cameras [345].
Fig. 116 shows a number of unmanned military balloons in operation
today.
Fig. 117 depicts several hybrid configurations, including tail-sitter
and dual systems that have been deployed by the military.
Helicopters are also popular configurations in military applications,
including operational missions. Their VTOL and hovering flight capa­
bilities and easy-to-deploy characteristics make them suitable for optical
and laser imaging, communication, border guarding, military support
and other military missions. They are being used in different shapes and
sizes (see Fig. 118) [350–352].
The range of military missions is quite diverse, and their re­
quirements and UASs’ specifications and configurations differ from one
mission to another. So it is not possible to narrow down the main
required specifications until all mission requirements have been iden­
tified in detail, which is outside the scope of this review. But it can be
concluded that almost every configuration of UASs is being used or can
be utilized in military missions and operations, including the bio-based
drones. For example, Defense Science and Technology Laboratory
(DSTL) of the ministry of defense of the United Kingdom has funded a
dragonfly inspired spying drone, which is specially designed for covert
operations (see Fig. 119) [353].

Fig. 119. The flapping wing military drone, Skeeter [353].

for horizontal cruise flight [333]. Another similar hybrid tilt-rotor drone
is that developed by Wingcopter Company intended for delivery of in­
sulin, vaccine and COVID-19 test kits in Africa. This drone configuration
allows an endurance of 72 h for a 3.5 kg of payload capacity [334,335].
Moreover, a dual system hybrid UAS has been prototyped by DDC
Company by combining a quadrotor and fixed-wing configurations,
which can carry a payload that weighs 11 kg payload and a delivery
range of up to 60 km [336]. Fig. 113 depicts several hybrid delivery
drones used by various companies.
The main challenge for delivery drones is their limited flight
endurance and cargo capacity. These two factors have a direct impact on
costs. In electrical powered UASs, increasing the number of batteries will
not increase flight endurance, so an optimized limited number of bat­
teries should be used to reach maximum flight endurance [337].

6.2.6. Marine and underwater missions
Some drones are intended to perform missions on the water and
underwater. These amphibious drones can be used to study marine life,
identify the location of oil spills, and for other military or civilian ap­
plications [5]. Because of the lack of space for horizontal take-off and
landing, most of these drones are designed based on VTOL configura­
tions but also possess some versions of HTOL configurations as well.
These drones can be launched from boats, submarines and ground or
beaches. A comprehensive survey of these types of drones has been given

6.2.5. Military missions
UASs in the military are used for dropping munitions, missile
launching, communication, communication disruption spying, medical
activities and so on. The most popular configuration for the military
missions is fixed-wing UAS. Fixed-wing UASs are being used in almost
every military mission, specifically in operational and combat assign­
ments. Due to the nature of the application, their configuration may
differ with respect to wing shape, tail and propulsion system. In fact,

Fig. 120. Views of fixed-wing marine drones; (a) UVS’s drone [356], (b) GULL’s drone [357], (c) DRS Technologies’ drone [358], and (d) solar-powered fixed-wing
seaplane developed by Eubank et al. [359].
46

S. Darvishpoor et al.

Progress in Aerospace Sciences 121 (2020) 100694

Fig. 121. Views of underwater HTOL drones; (a) fixed-wing underwater drone developed Weisler et al. [360] and (b) morphing wing underwater drone developed
by Siddall et al. [361].

Fig. 122. Views of seaplane multirotors; (a) HexH2O [364], (b) quadrotor developed by Esakki et al. [363], (c) quadrotor developed by Kawasaki et al. [366], and
(d) QuadH2O [365].

Fig. 123. Views of underwater multirotors; (a) quadrotor developed by Rawashdeh et al. [367] and (b) quadrotor developed by Johns Hopkins University’s re­
searchers [368].

Fig. 124. Hybrid seaplane lifeguard concept introduced by Hazken [369].

by Yang et al. for aquatic-aerial amphibious drones [354]. Another re­
view on the amphibious robots also has been done by Guo et al. [355].
The amphibious UASs can perform operations in both the air and on
the water surface. The main application of the seaplane UAS is to seek
enemy status reconnaissance and surveillance and marine environment

monitoring [354]. Moreover, there are many on the water or seaplane
drones with fixed-wing configuration. For example, UVS Company has
developed a fixed-wing amphibious drone with an engine in the middle
of the wing [356]. Other models have been developed by GULL [357]
and DRS Technologies [358]. A solar-powered version of an amphibious
47

S. Darvishpoor et al.

Progress in Aerospace Sciences 121 (2020) 100694

Fig. 125. Views of bio-inspired flapping-wing underwater drones; (a) flying fish developed by Gao and Tachet [370] and (b) flying fish developed by Cherney [371].

Fig. 126. Views of fixed-wing drones for space missions; (a) Titan exploration drone proposed by Pellerito et al. [381], (b) Venus exploration UAV proposed by
Acosta et al. [382], (c) Northrop Grumman’s fixed-wing Venus explorer [378], (d) NASA’s flying wing Mars explorer [379], (e) solar fixed-wing drone designed by
Landis [375], (f) solar fixed-wing Venus explorer drone designed by Xiongfeng et al. [377], and (g) NASA’s flying wing Mars explorer [380].

drone has been designed by Eubank et al. [359]. Fig. 120 shows several
of these amphibious drones.
Other underwater fixed-wing drones developed by researchers and
companies all over the world Include one by the Weisler et al. that is
capable of underwater operation (see Fig. 121(a)) [360] and another
morphing wing drone with a V-shape tail by Siddall et al. which is
inspired by plunge-diving birds (see Fig. 121(b)) [361].
Multi-rotors are also popular for underwater and on the water op­
erations. Waterspout is a coaxial contra-rotating underwater mono-rotor
that was designed in 2007 [362]. Esakki et al. developed a simple
quadrotor seaplane [363]. QuadH20 Company has also built a hexa­
copter and a quadrotor seaplane for marine applications [364,365].
Kawasaki et al. have designed and manufactured a quadrotor seaplane
with a light ring that keeps it afloat on the water surface and moves on
the dry land [366]. Views of these seaplane multi-rotors are shown in
Fig. 122.
Multirotors also have been used as underwater drones. For example,
Rawashdeh et al. developed an underwater quadrotor, which was able to
move in the air and under the water (see Fig. 123(a)) [367]. Researchers
at the Johns Hopkins University Applied Physics Laboratory have also
developed a similar quadrotor that can sit on a station beneath the
water, then launch into the air to perform a variety of missions (see
Fig. 123(b)) [368].
A novel concept was introduced by Hazken at the 2016 Red Dot
Design Competition, which is for amphibious drones. It is a lifeguard

drone and a combination of a water ski board and a quadrotor (see
Fig. 124) [369].
Bio-Inspired drones are one of the most useful configurations for
underwater operations. These include concepts and prototypes inspired
by flying fish. Gao and Tachet have developed a prototype of a compact
flapping-wing drone based on flying fish that is capable of swimming
underwater and gliding in the air. This drone has many potential ap­
plications in ocean exploration, mapping, surveillance, and forecasting
[370]. Cherney has designed and prototyped a similar underwater drone
[371]. Fig. 125 depicts two bio-inspired flapping-wing underwater
drones discussed above.
It should be noted that propulsion systems which are efficient in the
air may not be suitable for use underwater. For example, the propellers
in multirotors are designed to be efficient in high rpms, but due to the
different density of the water, the possible maximum rpm of the rotor in
water is much lower than in the air. This makes the multirotors to be less
efficient in the water. Therefore, some adaptations might be needed for
underwater phase to reach maximum efficiency [354].
6.2.7. Space mission
One of the newer applications of drones involves space missions.
Several drone designs and concepts have been proposed by researchers
for space explorations. For example, NASA is developing a co-axial
drone with a quadrotor configuration for Titan exploration, which will
be launched in 2026 and orbits Titan looking for origins and signs of life

Fig. 127. Views of multirotors drones for space missions; (a) NASA’s Dragonfly for Titan exploration [372], (b) NASA’s coaxial mono-rotor drone for Mars ex­
plorations [373], and (c) tri-rotor drone designed by Young et al. [384].
48

S. Darvishpoor et al.

Progress in Aerospace Sciences 121 (2020) 100694

Fig. 128. Views of hybrid drones for space missions, (a) Collins’s hybrid drone for Martian exploration [385], (b) NASA’s concept for Mars explorer hybrid UAS
[387], and (c) hybrid Mars explorer designed by Aguirre et al. [386].

Fig. 129. Views of Balloons for space missions; (a) Zero2Infinity’s near-space balloon, (b) University of Wales’s balloon [391], (c) NASA-funded robotic balloon
Stratosail [391], and (d) Mars solar hot air balloon [392].

Fig. 130. Views of flapping-wing drones for space missions; (a) drone developed by Zegers et al. [393] and (b) MLABs’ flapping wing Mars explorer [394].

[372]. They also have developed a coaxial mono-rotor with
counter-rotating blades for Mars explorations, which has passed the tests
and will be launched in July 2020 to demonstrate the viability and
potential of heavier-than-air vehicles use on Mars [373]. Another
concept presented by NASA for the Mars mission utilizes a tilt-body
hybrid configuration [374].
Some concepts are based on fixed-wing configuration. Landis et al.
have proposed a fixed-wing drone design intended for Venus exploration
[375]. Landis also has another concept that is a solar-powered fix­
ed-wing drone for Venus exploration [376]. Similar works were done by
Xiongfeng [377] and Northrop Grumman researchers for Venus explo­
ration [378]. Other flying-wing concepts have been introduced by NASA
for Mars explorations [379,380]. Pellerito et al. have designed a
fixed-wing UAV for Titan exploration [381]. Acosta et al. have also
studied a high temperature and high-pressure fixed-wing space drone for
Venus exploration [382]. Fig. 126 depicts several design concepts for the
drone exploration of space.
Some concepts and designs have been introduced based on

multirotors. Pergola and Cipoll have designed a hexarotor for Mars
exploration [383]. Young et al. also have proposed a tri-rotor UAS for
Venus exploration [384]. Fig. 127 shows multi-rotor drones for space
missions.
The hybrid configuration is among the popular configurations of
drones for space missions. For example, Collins has designed a tilt-rotor
drone using two tilt-rotors and one ducted fan with a combination of a
fixed-wing configuration for Martian exploration (see Fig. 128(a))
[385]. Aguirre et al. have proposed a dual system hybrid drone for Mars
exploration (see Fig. 128(c)) [386].
Another concept proposed for planetary exploration is the hybrid
balloon-drone model. This concept of the flying vehicle would address
several of the limitations drones currently encounter, such as power
requirements, weight, and time in flight. For the applications that need
static or slow motion, balloon-type drones can be employed with require
significantly less power, longer flight time, and greater flexibility [17].
Some versions of balloon drones are introduced by, for example, NASA
[388], Global Aerospace [389], Zero2Infinity [390] and so on, for
49

S. Darvishpoor et al.

Progress in Aerospace Sciences 121 (2020) 100694

Fig. 131. Views of different concepts of flapping-wing drones for space missions reviewed by Hassanalian et al. [17].

Fig. 132. Other miscellaneous applications of drones; (a) internet providing [395], (b) energy harvesting [396], (c) anti-drone [397], (d) vacant parking space
detection [405], (e) window cleaning drone [399], (f) wind turbine cleaning drone [402], (g) solar panel cleaning drone [400], (h) power tower cleaning drone
[401], (i) runway for other drones [403], and (j) swarm drone show [404].

near-space missions and planetary explorations. Fig. 129 shows the
balloon-type drones proposed for space exploration.
Some researchers have also tried to design flapping-wing drones for
space missions. Zegers et al. have proposed a flapping wing aerobot for
autonomous flight in the Martian atmosphere. This flapping-wing drone

is well suited for the low-density atmosphere of Mars (see Fig. 130(a))
[393]. A research group from Mountain Lake Labs (MLABs) has also
designed a bat-inspired flapping wing for Mars exploration (see Fig. 130
(b)) [394].
There are also some other similar concepts involving flapping-wing
50

S. Darvishpoor et al.

Progress in Aerospace Sciences 121 (2020) 100694

Fig. 133. Popular configurations for each category.

drones intended for space missions. A comprehensive review of the
space drones, including their specifications, applications and design
challenges, has been given by Hassanalian et al. [17]. The authors dis­
cussed and consolidated several concepts, research findings and studies
that have been performed on space drones for planetary exploration.
Fig. 131 depicts different concepts of flapping-wing drones for space
missions reviewed by Hassanalian et al. [17].
Considering the targeted solar body, the design of the space drones is
different. For example, the flight and performance of Venus-based
drones differ from Martian-based drones. The Martian atmosphere is
very thin compared to that on Earth [17]. The range of Reynolds
numbers that drones are able to fly in other solar bodies is one of the
most design factors that should be considered. On Earth, the Reynolds
numbers of drones are on the order of 106, while on Mars, they are on the
order of 105 [17]. Fixed-wing space drones that would fly in the Martian
environment require larger propellers to generate enough thrust due to
the lower values of atmospheric density [17].

and wind turbines [402]. Moreover, drones have been used as a runway
for other drones [403]. One of the most popular applications of drones is
for hobby. Many drones are now available for entertainment and ac­
tivities ranging from racing competition to aerial shows [404].
Furthermore, drones have been used for vacant parking space detection
[405]. Fig. 132 shows a number of miscellaneous applications of drones.
Fig. 133 illustrates the popular configurations for each category of
applications based on the reviewed examples. The fixed-wing UASs are
the most popular configurations among companies and researchers as
they have been used for almost any application. The second place be­
longs to the multirotors and specially quadrotors; even for space ex­
plorations, some concepts have been introduced based on multirotor
configurations. The helicopters and hybrid configurations are also two
of the popular configurations, although the hybrid UASs are predicted to
be more popular in the future because of their numerous advantages.
6.2.9. Summary
Table 3 summarizes the different applications/missions of UASs and
the corresponding requirements and specifications, based on the
reviewed examples. Considering the applications’ requirements and the
specifications of different configurations, summarized in Table 3, some
of the most suitable configurations for each application are suggested.
Each category of applications contains a wide range of different missions
with their own specific requirement. Therefore, the exact decision
should be made based on the mission. The column “Suitable configu­
rations” in Table 3 is a simple estimation of the suitable configurations
based on the common requirements of the missions in each category. In
some categories like military, space, and miscellaneous applications, we
have covered all of the currently used configurations, as suggested. Their
common requirements are indicated by “Based on mission”. For more
exact information about different missions and their requirements, the

6.2.8. Miscellaneous applications
UASs can be used in unconventional missions. For example, Google is
working on expanding internet connectivity with stratospheric balloons.
The plan is to extend the internet from the sky instead of ground to
expand connectivity to rural areas, fill coverage gaps, and improve
network resilience in the event of a disaster [395]. Google is also
working on energy harvesting using kites that generate electricity by
efficiently harnessing energy from wind resources that are not accessible
or cost-effective today [396]. Malou Tech has introduced its anti-drone
strategy, which is capturing drones with a net carried by another drone
[397]. Gade et al. have introduced a solution for keeping birds away
from airports [398]. Drones can also be used for cleaning tall buildings
and towers [399] or cleaning solar panels [400], power towers [401]
51

S. Darvishpoor et al.

Progress in Aerospace Sciences 121 (2020) 100694
[2] S. Rambat, A Low-Cost Remote Sensing System for Agricultural Applications,
Doctoral dissertation, Aston University, 2012.
[3] P.R. Baumann, History of remote sensing, photogrammetry. https://www.
oneonta.edu/faculty/baumanpr/geosat2/RS History I/RS-History-Part-1.htm.
(Accessed 4 May 2020).
[4] T.P. Banu, G.F. Borlea, C. Banu, The use of drones in forestry, J. Environ. Sci. Eng.
B 5 (2016) 557–562.
[5] M. Hassanalian, A. Abdelkefi, Classifications, applications, and design challenges
of drones: a review, Prog. Aero. Sci. 91 (2017) 99–131.
[6] A. Aboelezz, M. Hassanalian, A. Desoki, B. Elhadidi, G. El-Bayoumi, Design,
experimental investigation, and nonlinear flight dynamics with atmospheric
disturbances of a fixed-wing micro air vehicle, Aero. Sci. Technol. 97 (2020),
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ast.2019.105636.
[7] A. Mirzaeinia, M. Hassanalian, K. Lee, M. Mirzaeinia, Energy conservation of Vshaped swarming fixed-wing drones through position reconfiguration, Aero. Sci.
Technol. 94 (2019) 105398.
[8] A. Mirzaeinia, M. Hassanalian, M. Shekaramiz, M. Mirzaeinia, Loader and tester
swarming drones for cellular phone network loading and field test: non-stochastic
particle swarm optimization, Journal of Autonomous Intelligence 2 (No. 2)
(2019) 14–24.
[9] A. Mirzaeinia, M. Hassanalian, Minimum-cost drone‒nest matching through the
kuhn‒munkres algorithm in smart cities: energy management and efficiency
enhancement, Aerospace 6 (No. 11) (2019) 125.
[10] M. Hassanalian, D. Rice, S. Johnstone, A. Abdelkefi, Performance analysis of fixed
wing space drones in different solar system bodies, Acta Astronaut. 152 (2018)
27–48.
[11] A. Mirzaeinia, M. Hassanalian, K. Lee, Drones for borders surveillance:
autonomous battery maintenance station and replacement for multirotor drones,
in: AIAA SciTech 2020, Orlando, FL, 2020, pp. 6–10. January.
[12] V. Pellerito, M. Olivas, M. Hassanalian, Design a fixed-wing unmanned aerial
vehicle with dynamic soaring capability for titan exploration, in: AIAA SciTech
2020, Orlando, FL, 2020, pp. 6–10. January.
[13] J. Shahmoradi, A. Mirzaeinia, M. Hassanalian, P. Roghanchi, Monitoring of
inaccessible areas in GPS-denied underground mines using a fully autonomous
encased safety inspection drone, in: AIAA SciTech 2020, Orlando, FL, 2020,
pp. 6–10. January.
[14] R. Sappington, G. Acosta, M. Hassanalian, K. Lee, R. Morelli, Drone stations in
airports for runway and airplane inspection using image processing techniques,
in: 2019 AIAA Aviation Forum, Dallas, TX, 2019, pp. 17–21.
[15] G.A. Acosta, D. Grow, M. Hassanalian, Design and analysis of a high pressure and
high temperature fixed wing space drone for Venus exploration, in: 2019 AIAA
Aviation Forum, Dallas, TX, 2019, pp. 17–21. June.
[16] M. Hassanalian, R. Salazar, A. Abdelkefi, Analysis and optimization of a tilt rotor
unmanned air vehicle for long distances delivery and payload transportation, in:
2018 AIAA/ASCE/AHS/ASC Structures, Structural Dynamics, and Materials
Conference, 2018. Kissimmee, Florida, 8–12 January.
[17] M. Hassanalian, D. Rice, A. Abdelkefi, Evolution of space drones for planetary
exploration: a review, Prog. Aero. Sci. 97 (2018) 61–105.
[18] L. Brooke-Holland, Unmanned Aerial Vehicles (Drones), An Introduction” House
of Commons Library, UK, 2012.
[19] A. Arjomandi, S. Agostino, M. Mammone, M. Nelson, T. Zhou, Classification of
unmanned aerial vehicle, in: Report for Mechanical Engineering Class, University
of Adelaide, Adelaide, Australia, 2006.
[20] R.E. Weibel, R.J. Hansman, Safety considerations for operation of different classes
of UAVs in the NAS, in: Proceedings of the 4th Aviation Technology, Integration
and Operations Forum, AIAA 3rd Unmanned Unlimited Technical Conference,
Workshop and Exhibit, 2004. September.
[21] A.S. Saeed, A.B. Younes, C. Cai, G. Cai, A survey of hybrid unmanned aerial
vehicles, in: Progress in Aerospace Sciences, vol. 98, 2018, pp. 91–105.
[22] M. Hassanalian, A. Abdelkefi, Design, manufacturing, and flight testing of a fixed
wing micro air vehicle with Zimmerman planform, Meccanica 52 (No. 6) (2017)
1265–1282.
[23] M. Hassanalian, H. Khaki, M. Khosrawi, A new method for design of fixed wing
micro air vehicle, in: Proceedings of the Institution of Mechanical Engineers, Part
G, vol. 229, 2014, pp. 837–850.
[24] A. Stempeck, M. Hassanalian, A. Abdelkefi, Aerodynamic performance of
albatross-inspired wing shape for marine unmanned air vehicles, in: 36th AIAA
Applied Aerodynamics Conference, 2018, pp. 25–29. Atlanta, Georgia.
[25] J. Taylor (Ed.), “Jayne’s All the World’s Aircraft 1980–81”, Jane’s Publishing,
1980.
[26] https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wing_configuration. (Accessed 4 May 2020).
Retrieved online on.
[27] https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Empennage. (Accessed 4 May 2020). Retrieved
online on.
[28] E.A. Ahmed, A. Hafez, A.N. Ouda, H. Ahmed, H. Abd-Elkader, Modelling of a
small unmanned aerial vehicle, Adv. Robot. Autom. 4 (No. 1) (2015) 1–11.
[29] N. Guido, S. Mohammadi, M. Hassanalian, S. Bakhtiyarov, Surface temperature
effects of solar panels of fixed wing unmanned aerial vehicles on flight
performance, in: 2019 AIAA Aviation Forum, 2019, pp. 17–21. Dallas, TX.
[30] M. Hassanalian, M. Radmanesh, A. Sedaghat, Increasing flight endurance of
MAVs using multiple quantum well solar cells, International Journal of
Aeronautical and Space Sciences 15 (2) (2014) 212–217.
[31] Wikipedia, List of Unmanned Aerial Vehicles of China, Wikipedia, 2020, p. 1. htt
ps://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/List_of_unmanned_aerial_vehicles_of_China.
(Accessed 4 May 2020). Retrieved online on.

Table 3
UAS configurations suited to a given application/mission.
Application/Mission

Common
requirements

Suitable configurations

Inspection, Survey and
Mapping

• Endurance
• Payload capacity
• Robustness

Agriculture and Environment
Research

•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•

Fixed-wing
Lighter than Air
Multirotors
Helicopter
Hybrid
Fixed-wing
Multirotor
Helicopter
Fixed-wing
Multirotor
Helicopter

Search and Rescue (SAR)

Mail and Delivery

Endurance
Payload capacity
Robustness
Speed
Maneuverability
Endurance
Payload capacity
Robustness
Endurance
Payload capacity
Robustness

Military

Based on mission

Naval

• Endurance
• Waterproof
• Speed

Space

Based on mission

Miscellaneous

Based on mission

Fixed-wing
Multirotor
Helicopter
Hybrid
Fixed-wing
Morphing wing
Multirotor
Helicopter
Balloon
Hybrid
Bio-Inspired
Fixed-wing
Morphing wing
Multirotor
Hybrid
Bio-Inspired (Flappingwing)
Fixed-wing
Multirotor
Balloon
Hybrid
Bio-inspired (Flappingwing)
Based on mission

reader can refer to the previous sections.
7. Conclusions
This review provides an update of advances in the structure,
configuration, and flight mechanisms of different types of unmanned
aerial systems. Clearly, this research was not intended to be all-inclusive
and examine the entire activities in the field. However, it has been our
attempt to identify the general framework of progress made to the extent
possible. In this paper, a comprehensive concept for the classification of
drones based on configuration and flight mechanism is presented. The
UASs are classified into four main categories – Horizontal Takeoff and
Landing (HTOL), Vertical Takeoff and Landing (VTOL), Hybrid, and Biobased drones. The sub-categories of each class and their advantages and
shortcomings have been critically reviewed. The type of UASs consid­
ered included those capable of military and civilian operations, such as
search and rescue, environment protection, mail service and delivery,
space exploration, and smart cities.
Declaration of competing interest
The authors declare that they have no known competing financial
interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence
the work reported in this paper.
References
[1] G.K. Moore, What is a picture worth? A history of remote sensing/Quelle est la
valeur d’une image? Un tour d’horizon de télédétection, Hydrol. Sci. Bull. 24 (No.
4) (1979) 477–485.

52

S. Darvishpoor et al.

Progress in Aerospace Sciences 121 (2020) 100694

[32] Wikipedia, IAI searcher, 2020. https://wikivisually.com/wiki/IAI_Searcher.
(Accessed 4 May 2020). Retrieved online on.
[33] T. Breunig, Triple Junction Solar Cell Achieves 37.7% Efficiency,
Cleantechconcepts, 2018, p. 4. http://www.cleantechconcepts.com/2
018/04/triple-junction-solar-cell-achieves-37-7-efficiency/. (Accessed 20
October 2020).
[34] UAV Factory LTD., Penguin B, 2020. https://www.uavfactory.com/files/peng
uin_B_datasheet.pdf. (Accessed 4 May 2020). Retrieved online on.
[35] P. Panagiotou, K. Yakinthos, Aerodynamic efficiency and performance
enhancement of fixed-wing UAVs, Aero. Sci. Technol. 99 (2020) 105575.
[36] A. Panta, A. Mohamed, M. Marino, S. Watkins, A. Fisher, Unconventional control
solutions for small fixed wing unmanned aircraft, Prog. Aero. Sci. 102 (2018)
122–135.
[37] A. Mohamed, K. Massey, S. Watkins, R. Clothier, The attitude control of fixedwing MAVS in turbulent environments, Prog. Aero. Sci. 66 (2014) 37–48.
[38] S. Smith, Future Aircraft: Joined Wing Wind Tunnel Model, NASA, Available
from, https://www.nasa.gov/centers/langley/multimedia/iotw-tdt-wing.html.
(Accessed 15 May 2020). Retrieved online on.
[39] John W. Gallman, Stephen C. Smith, Ilan M. Kroo, Optimization of joined-wing
aircraft, J. Aircraft 30 (No. 6) (1993) 897–905.
[40] J. Wolkovitch, The joined wing-An overview, J. Aircraft 23 (No. 3) (1986)
161–178.
[41] N. Paletta, M. Belardo, M. Pecora, Load alleviation on a joined-wing unmanned
aircraft, J. Aircraft 47 (No. 6) (2010) 2005–2016.
[42] D. Zafirov, Joined wing UAV maneuverability, in: International Journal of
Research in Engineering and Technology, vol. 2, 2013, pp. 377–380.
[43] D. Zafirov, H. Panayotov, Joined-wing test bed UAV, CEAS Aeronautical Journal
6 (No. 1) (2015) 137–147.
[44] Robbins, B.A. and Cassidy, P.F., Boeing Co, “VTOL UAV with lift fans in joined
wings” U.S. Patent 7,410,122, 2008.
[45] R. Cavallaro, L. Demasi, Challenges, ideas, and innovations of joined-wing
configurations: a concept from the past, an opportunity for the future, Prog. Aero.
Sci. 87 (2016) 1–93.
[46] A. Quintana, M. Hassanalian, A. Abdelkefi, Aerodynamic analysis of a morphing
drone with spanning and sweeping in transition modes, in: 2018 AIAA/AHS
Adaptive Structures Conference, Kissimmee, Florida, 2018, pp. 8–12. January.
[47] M. Hassanalian, A. Quintana, A. Abdelkefi, Morphing micro unmanned air
vehicle: sizing process and stability, Aero. Sci. Technol. 78 (2018) 130–146.
[48] D. Li, S. Zhao, A. Da Ronch, J. Xiang, J. Drofelnik, Y. Li, L. Zhang, Y. Wu,
M. Kintscher, H.P. Monner, A. Rudenko, A review of modelling and analysis of
morphing wings, Prog. Aero. Sci. 100 (2018) 46–62.
[49] Z. Min, V.K. Kien, L.J. Richard, Aircraft morphing wing concepts with radical
geometry change, IES J. Part A Civ. Struct. Eng. 3 (No. 3) (2010) 188–195.
[50] P. Ifju, D. Jenkins, S. Ettinger, Y. Lian, W. Shyy, M. Waszak, Flexible-wing-based
micro air vehicles, in: 40th AIAA Aerospace Sciences Meeting & Exhibit, 2002.
Reston, Virginia, January.
[51] D. Li, S. Zhao, A. Da Ronch, J. Xiang, J. Drofelnik, Y. Li, L. Zhang, Y. Wu,
M. Kintscher, H.P. Monner, A. Rudenko, A review of modelling and analysis of
morphing wings, Prog. Aero. Sci. 100 (2018) 46–62.
[52] J. Seifert, A review of the Magnus effect in aeronautics, Prog. Aero. Sci. 55 (2012)
17–45.
[53] C. Badalamenti, On the Application of Rotating Cylinders to Micro Air Vehicles,
Doctoral dissertation, City University London, 2010.
[54] Jiwei, T., Yan, H., and Bifeng, S., “High-altitude Unmanned Plane Equipped with
Magnus Effect Propulsion System” patent, CN103434640A, China, 2013.
[55] Q. Hou, Y. Zhu, Y. Gao, J. Zhao, H. Jin, Modeling and control of a magnus-effectbased ducted fan aerial vehicle, Int. J. Contr. Autom. Syst. 13 (No. 4) (2015)
934–941.
[56] Måns, Magnuseffecten pa flygplan 9, 2015. Bergodalbana, http://bergodalbana.
blogspot.com/2015/09/. (Accessed 20 October 2020).
[57] Siliang, D. and Zhengfei, T., “The aerodynamic behavioral study of tandem fan
wing configuration” International Journal of Aerospace Engineering, Vol. 2018,
2018.
[58] B. Li, Y. He, J. Han, J. Xiao, A new modeling scheme for powered parafoil
unmanned aerial vehicle platforms: theory and experiments, Chin. J. Aeronaut.
32 (No. 11) (2019) 2466–2479.
[59] S.T. Qu, Unmanned powered paraglider flight path control based on PID neutral
network, in: IOP Conference Series: Materials Science and Engineering, vol. 470,
2019, 012008. No. 1.
[60] M. Watanabe, Y. Ochi, Modeling and motion analysis for a powered paraglider
(PPG)”, in: SICE Annual Conference 2007, IEEE, Takamatsu, Japan, 2007,
pp. 3007–3012, 17-20 Sept.
[61] T. Holten, A single rotor without reaction torque: a violation of Newton’s Laws or
feasible?, in: 28th European Rotorcraft Forum, 2002.
[62] J. Wan, M.D. Pavel, The Ornicopter–a tailless helicopter with active flapping
blades, Aeronaut. J. 118 (No. 1205) (2014) 743–773.
[63] M. Heiligers, R. Kuiper, T. van Holten, S. van den Bulcke, Development of a
Radio-Controlled Ornicopter: a single rotor helicopter without reaction torque,
SAE Trans. (2005) 740–755.
[64] J. Wan, M.D. Pavel, Designing the Ornicopter, a tailless helicopter with active
flapping blades: a case study, in: Proceedings of the Institution of Mechanical
Engineers, Part G: Journal of Aerospace Engineering, vol. 230, 2016,
pp. 2195–2219. No. 12.
[65] M.G. De Giorgi, T. Donateo, A. Ficarella, D. Fontanarosa, A.E. Morabito,
L. Scalinci, Numerical investigation of the performance of contra-rotating

[66]
[67]
[68]
[69]

[70]
[71]
[72]
[73]
[74]

[75]
[76]
[77]

[78]

[79]

[80]
[81]
[82]
[83]
[84]
[85]
[86]
[87]
[88]
[89]
[90]
[91]
[92]

[93]
[94]
[95]

53

propellers for a remotely piloted aerial vehicle, Energy Procedia 126 (2017)
1011–1018.
Dorniote1, Dornier GEAMOS/SEAMOS, Wikipedia, 2020, p. 1. https://de.
wikipedia.org/wiki/Dornier_GEAMOS/SEAMOS. (Accessed 4 May 2020).
Retrieved online on.
Avistar, Kamov ka-137, Avistar, 2020, p. 1. http://www.aviastar.org/helicop
ters_eng/ka-137.php. (Accessed 4 May 2020). Retrieved online on.
VGR-Systems, Thrust Vectoring Coaxial Drone Update, DIY Drones, 2020, p. 1.
Available from, https://diydrones.com/profiles/blogs/thrust-vectoring-co
axial-drone-update. (Accessed 4 May 2020). Retrieved online on.
Vabry, Skybotix CoaX Autonomous Micro-helicopter Drone, Robotshop, 2010,
p. 1. Available from, https://www.robotshop.com/community/blog/sho
w/skybotix-coax-autonomous-micro-helicopter-drone. (Accessed 30 October
2020). Retrieved online on.
Z. Song, K. Sun, Adaptive fault tolerant control for a small coaxial rotor
unmanned aerial vehicles with partial loss of actuator effectiveness, Aero. Sci.
Technol. 88 (2019) 362–379.
F. Wang, J. Cui, B.M. Chen, T.H. Lee, Flight dynamics modeling of coaxial
rotorcraft UAVs, in: Handbook of Unmanned Aerial Vehicles, 2014,
pp. 1217–1256.
R.D. Robinett III, B.R. Sturgis, S.A. Kerr, Moving mass trim control for aerospace
vehicles, J. Guid. Contr. Dynam. 19 (No. 5) (1996) 1064–1070.
Heaven Jr, G.H. and Walden, M.K., LTAS Holdings LLC, “Mass transfer system for
stabilizing an airship and other vehicles subject to pitch and roll moments” U.S.
Patent 7,185,848, 2007.
T. Haus, N. Prkut, K. Borovina, B. Marić, M. Orsag, S. Bogdan, A novel concept of
attitude control for large multirotor-UAVs based on moving mass control, in:
2016 24th Mediterranean Conference on Control and Automation (MED), IEEE,
Athens, Greece, 2016, pp. 832–839, 21-24 June.
T. Haus, M. Orsag, S. Bogdan, A concept of a non-tilting multirotor-uav based on
moving mass control, in: 2017 International Conference on Unmanned Aircraft
Systems (ICUAS), IEEE, Miami, FL, USA, 2017, pp. 1618–1624, 13-16 June.
J. Li, C. Gao, C. Li, W. Jing, A survey on moving mass control technology, Aero.
Sci. Technol. 82 (2018) 594–606.
C. Bermes, S. Leutenegger, S. Bouabdallah, D. Schafroth, R. Siegwart, New design
of the steering mechanism for a mini coaxial helicopter, in: 2008 IEEE/RSJ
International Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems, IEEE, Nice, France,
2008, pp. 1236–1241, 22-26 September.
D. Schafroth, C. Bermes, S. Bouabdallah, R. Siegwart, Micro helicopter steering:
review and design for the mufly project, in: 2008 IEEE/ASME International
Conference on Mechtronic and Embedded Systems and Applications, IEEE,
Beijing, China, 2008, pp. 216–221, 12-15 October.
C. Bermes, K. Sartori, D. Schafroth, S. Bouabdallah, R. Siegwart, Control of a
coaxial helicopter with center of gravity steering, in: International Conference on
Simulation, Modeling and Programing for Autonomous Robots, Venice, Italy,
2008, pp. 492–500, 3-4 November.
P.K. Yadav, K. Kalirajan, Dynamic model of a MAV with COG shifting mechanism,
in: IFAC Proceedings Volumes, vol. 47, 2014, pp. 380–385. No. 1.
S. Bouabdallah, R. Siegwart, G. Caprari, Design and control of an indoor coaxial
helicopter, in: 2006 IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelligent Robots and
Systems, Beijing, China, 2006, pp. 2930–2935, 9-15 Oct.
S. Darvishpoor, J. Roshanian, M. Tayefi, A novel concept of VTOL bi-rotor UAV
based on moving mass control, Aero. Sci. Technol. 107 (2020) 106238.
M. Eriksson, Performance Estimation of a Ducted Fan UAV, Master thesis,
Department of Electrical Engineering, Linköping University, 2006.
K. Munson, Jane‘s Unmanned Aerial Vehicles and Targets, Jane’s Information
Group Limited, Surrey, 1996.
Werner, D. and Wasserman, N., “Unmanned aircraft roundup 2015” Available
from https://aviation.aiaa.org/uploadedFiles/AIAA-Aviation_Site/Furth
er_Reading/2015 UAV ROUNDUP (002).pdf, Retrieved online on 4 May 2020.
The Register, “Another 180 ’hover & stare’ ducted fan bots for US forces”,
https://www.theregister.co.uk/2008/11/05/mav_goes_t_hawk/, Retrieved online
on 4 May 2020.
S. Deng, S. Wang, Z. Zhang, Aerodynamic performance assessment of a ducted fan
UAV for VTOL applications, Aero. Sci. Technol. (2020) 105895.
W. Fan, C. Xiang, H. Najjaran, X. Wang, B. Xu, Mixed adaptive control
architecture for a novel coaxial-ducted-fan aircraft under time-varying
uncertainties, Aero. Sci. Technol. 76 (2018) 141–154.
T. Manzoor, Z. Sun, Y. Xia, D. Ma, MPC based compound flight control strategy
for a ducted fan aircraft, Aero. Sci. Technol. (2020) 106264.
J. Toledo, L. Acosta, M. Sigut, J.J. Rodrigo, Design and implementation of H-inf
controller for micro-monocopter, Electron. Lett. 44 (No. 12) (2008) 719–721.
L. Petricca, P. Ohlckers, C. Grinde, Micro- and nano-air vehicles: state of the art,
International Journal of Aerospace Engineering 2011 (2011), https://doi.org/
10.1155/2011/214549. Article ID 214549, 17 pages.
F.S. Gonçalves, J.P. Bodanese, R. Donadel, G.V. Raffo, J.E. Normey-Rico, L.
B. Becker, Small scale UAV with birotor configuration, in: In 2013 International
Conference on Unmanned Aircraft Systems (ICUAS), IEEE, Atlanta, GA, USA,
2013, pp. 761–768, 28-31 May.
S. Agarwal, A. Mohan, K. Kumar, Design and fabrication of twinrotor UAV, in:
Department of Mechatronics, Manipal University, India, 2013.
P. Chalupa, J. Přikryl, J. Novák, Modelling of twin rotor MIMO system, Procedia
Engineering” 100 (2015) 249–258.
C. Papachristos, K. Alexis, A. Tzes, Design and experimental attitude control of an
unmanned tilt-rotor aerial vehicle, in: 15th International Conference on

S. Darvishpoor et al.

[96]
[97]
[98]
[99]
[100]
[101]
[102]
[103]
[104]
[105]

[106]
[107]
[108]
[109]
[110]

[111]
[112]
[113]
[114]
[115]
[116]
[117]
[118]

[119]
[120]
[121]
[122]
[123]
[124]

Progress in Aerospace Sciences 121 (2020) 100694

Advanced Robotics (ICAR), IEEE, Tallinn, Estonia, 2011, pp. 465–470, 20-23
June.
NASA, Ducted Fan Designs Lead to Potential New Vehicles, 2010, p. 1. Available
from, https://spinoff.nasa.gov/Spinoff2010/t_4.html. (Accessed 4 May 2020).
Retrieved online on.
K. Siddhardha, A novel bi-rotor configuration and its control, IFAC-PapersOnLine
51 (No. 1) (2018) 456–461.
S.K. Sai, H.M. Tun, Modeling and analysis of tri-copter (VTOL) aircraft,
International Journal of Emerging Engineering Research and Technology 3
(2015) 54–62.
J. Escareno, A. Sanchez, O. Garcia, R. Lozano, Triple tilting rotor mini-UAV:
modeling and embedded control of the attitude, in: 2008 American Control
Conference, IEEE, Seattle, WA, USA, 2008, pp. 3476–3481, 11-13 June.
D. Kastelan, M. Konz, J. Rudolph, Fully actuated tricopter with pilot-supporting
control, IFAC-PapersOnLine 48 (No. 9) (2015) 79–84.
Bestadvisor, Best tricopters for fun and pleasure 1, 2020. https://www.bestadv
isor.com/tricopters. (Accessed 4 May 2020). Retrieved online on.
M.K. Mohamed, A. Lanzon, Design and control of novel tri-rotor UAV, in:
Proceedings of 2012 UKACC International Conference on Control, IEEE, Cardiff,
UK, 2012, pp. 304–309, 3-5 September.
S.N. Ghazbi, A.A. Akbari, M.R. Gharib, Quadrotor: full dynamic modeling,
nonlinear simulation and control of attitudes, Indian J. Sci. Res. 1 (No. 2) (2014)
759–772.
F. Sabatino, Quadrotor control: modeling, nonlinear control design, and
simulation, Master thesis, School of Electrical Engineering, Automatic Control,
KTH Royal Institute of Technology, 2015.
L. Amezquita-Brooks, E. Liceaga-Castro, M. Gonzalez-Sanchez, O. Garcia-Salazar,
D. Martinez-Vazquez, Towards a standard design model for quad-rotors: a review
of current models, their accuracy and a novel simplified model, Prog. Aero. Sci.
95 (2017) 1–23.
A. Rones, Modular Design of Integrated Duct Fan Quadrotor Structure, Master’s
thesis, Arctic University of Norway, 2017.
Mikeshouts, Bladeless Drone Is Impressive, but Not Quite Bladeless as it Says it
Is”, 2020, p. 1. https://mikeshouts.com/bladeless-drone-by-stefano-rivellini.
(Accessed 4 May 2020). Retrieved online on.
X. Chen, D. Li, Y. Bai, Z. Xu, Modeling and neuro-fuzzy adaptive attitude control
for eight-rotor MAV, Int. J. Contr. Autom. Syst. 9 (No. 6) (2011) 1154–1163.
S.J. Haddadi, P. Zarafshan, Design and fabrication of an autonomous octorotor
flying robot, in: 2015 3rd RSI International Conference on Robotics and
Mechatronics (ICROM), IEEE, Tehran, Iran, 2015, pp. 702–707, 7-9 Oct.
S. Tashreef, L. Iftekhar, S. Azmeen-ur-Rahman, Design of a crash-resistant PDcontrolled quadcopter using coaxial propeller system, in: 2016 International
Conference on Unmanned Aircraft Systems (ICUAS), IEEE, Arlington, VA, USA,
2016, pp. 986–992, 7-10 June.
M. Saied, B. Lussier, I. Fantoni, H. Shraim, C. Francis, Fault diagnosis and faulttolerant control of an octorotor UAV using motors speeds measurements, IFACPapersOnLine 50 (No. 1) (2017) 5263–5268.
R. Ji, J. Ma, S.S. Ge, Modeling and control of a tilting quadcopter, in: IEEE
Transactions on Aerospace and Electronic Systems, 2019, https://doi.org/
10.1109/TAES.2019.2955525.
A. Nemati, M. Kumar, Modeling and control of a single axis tilting quadcopter, in:
2014 American Control Conference, IEEE, Portland, OR, USA, 2014,
pp. 3077–3082, 4-6 June.
F. Şenkul, E. Altuğ, Modeling and control of a novel tilt—roll rotor quadrotor
UAV, in: 2013 International Conference on Unmanned Aircraft Systems (ICUAS),
IEEE, Atlanta, GA, USA, 2013, pp. 1071–1076, 28-31 May.
A. Bin Junaid, A. Diaz De Cerio Sanchez, J. Betancor Bosch, N. Vitzilaios,
Y. Zweiri, Design and implementation of a dual-axis tilting quadcopter, Robotics 7
(No. 4) (2018) 65.
Aimdroix, XRay Tilt-rotor quad DIY ARF FPV kit, Available from, http://store.
aimdroix.com/product-p/adx1501.htm. (Accessed 4 May 2020). Retrieved online
on.
DJI, Insire 1 Pro, DJI, Available from, https://www.dji.com/inspire-1-pro-and-r
aw. (Accessed 4 May 2020). Retrieved online on.
T. Haus, A. Ivanovic, M. Car, M. Orsag, S. Bogdan, “Mid-ranging control concept
for a multirotor UAV with moving masses, in: In 2018 26th Mediterranean
Conference on Control and Automation (MED), IEEE, Zadar, Croatia, 2018,
pp. 339–344, 19-22 June.
T. Haus, M. Orsag, S. Bogdan, Design considerations for a large quadrotor with
moving mass control, in: 2016 International Conference on Unmanned Aircraft
Systems (ICUAS), IEEE, Arlington, VA, USA, June 2016, pp. 1327–1334, 7-10.
Telegraph, Dyson fan: was it invented 30 years ago?, 2020, p. 1. https://www.tele
graph.co.uk/technology/news/6377644/Dyson-fan-was-it-invented-30-years-ago
.html. (Accessed 4 May 2020). Retrieved online on.
M. Jafari, H. Afshin, B. Farhanieh, A. Sojoudi, Numerical investigation of
geometric parameter effects on the aerodynamic performance of a Bladeless fan,
Alexandria Engineering Journal 55 (No. 1) (2016) 223–233.
B. Clarkson, Bladeless Drone Concept, Behance.Net, 2020, p. 1. Available from,
https://www.behance.net/gallery/59308709/Bladeless-Drone-Concept.
(Accessed 4 May 2020). Retrieved online on.
Yanko Design, The Dyson of Drones: Designer: Edgar Herrera, 2017, p. 8. https
://www.yankodesign.com/2017/08/18/the-dyson-of-drones/. (Accessed 4 May
2020). Retrieved online on.
Y. Zhang, Z. Chen, X. Zhang, Q. Sun, M. Sun, A novel control scheme for
quadrotor UAV based upon active disturbance rejection control, Aero. Sci.
Technol. 79 (2018) 601–609.

[125] Yuneec, TYPHOON H vol. 1, Yuneec, 2020. https://www.yuneec.com/en_US/dr
ones/typhoon-h/overview.html. (Accessed 4 May 2020). Retrieved online on.
[126] M. Ryll, D. Bicego, A. Franchi, “Modeling and control of FAST-Hex: a fullyactuated by synchronized-tilting hexarotor” in 2016, in: IEEE/RSJ International
Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems (IROS), IEEE, Daejeon, South
Korea, 2016, pp. 1689–1694, 9-14 Oct.
[127] R.J. Collins, “Coanda–a new airspace platform for UAVs” In Seventeenth
International Conference, 2002. Bristol, United Kingdom.
[128] C. Barlow, D. Lewis, S.D. Prior, S. Odedra, M.A. Erbil, M. Karamanoglu, R. Collins,
Investigating the use of the coanda effect to create novel unmanned aerial
vehicles, in: International Conference on Manufacturing and Engineering
Systems, Proceedings, Huwei, Taiwan, December 2009, pp. 386–391, 17-19.
[129] DIY Drones, Coanda effect saucer (CES) UAV with an ArduIMU+ V2, Available
from, https://diydrones.com/profiles/blogs/coanda-effect-saucer-ces-uav.
(Accessed 4 May 2020). Retrieved online on.
[130] F. Nedelcuţ, Towards a New Class of Aerial Vehicles Using the Coanda Effect,
Dunarea de Jos University, Galati, Romania, 2010.
[131] b. Collins, The Coanda Disk Aircraft Development Program, Wimborne, Dorset,
England, 2013, 14 March.
[132] E. Haque, S. Hossain, M. Assad-Uz-Zaman, M. Mashud, Design and construction of
an unmanned aerial vehicle based on Coanda effect, in: Proceedings of the
International Conference on Mechanical Engineering and Renewable Energy
(ICMERE2015), Chittagong, Bangladesh, 2015, pp. 26–29. November.
[133] F. Nedelcut, Coanda effect UAV-a new born baby in the unmanned aerial vehicles
family, Review of the Air Force Academy 2 (2010) 21.
[134] E. Lanteigne, A. Alsayed, D. Robillard, S.G. Recoskie, Modeling and control of an
unmanned airship with sliding ballast, J. Intell. Rob. Syst. 88 (2–4) (2017)
285–297.
[135] S.M. Gammon, M.T. Frye, C. Qian, The mathematical model of the tri-turbofan
airship for autonomous formation control research, Dynamics 1 (2) (2006).
[136] A. Elfes, J.F. Montgomery, J.L. Hall, J. Payne, S.S. Joshi, C.F. Bergh, A. TrebiOllennu, Autonomous flight control for a TITAN exploration AEROBOT” 8th
international symposium on artificial intelligence, in: B. Battrick (Ed.), Robotics
and Automation in Space (I-SAIRAS 2005), vol. 1, ESA SP-603. European Space
Agency, 2005, p. 91.
[137] E. Hygounenc, I.K. Jung, P. Soueres, S. Lacroix, The autonomous blimp project of
laas-cnrs: achievements in flight control and terrain mapping, Int. J. Robot Res.
23 (No. 4–5) (2004) 473–511.
[138] J.G. Ramos, E.C. de Paiva, J.R. Azinheira, S.S. Bueno, S.M. Maeta, L.G. Mirisola,
M. Bergerman, B.G. Faria, Autonomous flight experiment with a robotic
unmanned airship, in: Proceedings 2001 ICRA, IEEE International Conference on
Robotics and Automation (Cat. No. 01CH37164), Seoul, Korea, vol. 4, 2001,
pp. 4152–4157. May 21-26.
[139] A. Kornienko, System Identification Approach for Determining Flight Dynamical
Characteristics of an Airship from Flight Data, University of Stuttgart, 2006.
[140] L. Liao, I. Pasternak, A review of airship structural research and development,
Prog. Aero. Sci. 45 (No. 4–5) (2009) 83–96.
[141] Y. Li, M. Nahon, I. Sharf, Airship dynamics modeling: a literature review, Prog.
Aero. Sci. 47 (No. 3) (2011) 217–239.
[142] J. Wang, X. Meng, G. Wu, Path following of the autonomous airship with
compensation of unknown wind and modeling uncertainties, Aero. Sci. Technol.
93 (2019) 105349.
[143] T. Salazar, Mathematical model and simulation for a helicopter with tail rotor, in:
Proceedings of the 9th WSEAS International Conference on Computational
Intelligence, Man-Machine Systems and Cybernetics, 2010, 27–33 978-960-474257-8.
[144] H. Muhammad, H.P. Thien, T. Mulyanto, Mathematical modeling, simulation and
identification of micro coaxial helicopter, Journal of KONES 19 (2012) 353–364.
[145] X. Yin, D. Zhang, Q. Fang, L. Shen, Research on modeling and stability control of
micro unmanned helicopter, in: 2017 29th Chinese Control and Decision
Conference (CCDC), IEEE, Chongqing, China, 2017, pp. 6618–6622, 28-30 May.
[146] M. Mohammadzahei, H. Ziaiefar, M. Ghodsi, I.B. Bahadur, Yaw control of an
unmanned helicopter with feedback linearization, in: 2019 1st International
Conference on Unmanned Vehicle Systems-Oman (UVS), IEEE, Muscat, Oman,
2019, pp. 1–5, 5-7 Feb.
[147] A.T. Conlisk, Modern helicopter rotor aerodynamics, in: Progress in Aerospace
Sciences, vol. 37, 2001, pp. 419–476. No. 5.
[148] A. Brocklehurst, G.N. Barakos, A review of helicopter rotor blade tip shapes, in:
Progress in Aerospace Sciences, vol. 56, 2013, pp. 35–74.
[149] M. Brain, How Helicopters Work, HOWSTUFFWORKS, 2020, p. 1. Available from,
https://science.howstuffworks.com/transport/flight/modern/helicopter6.htm.
(Accessed 4 May 2020). Retrieved online on.
[150] Huayiuav, SY260H Coaxial Unmanned Helicopter, Huayiuav, 2020, p. 1.
Available from, http://www.en.huayiuav.com/unmanned-helicopter/d-cclx-coa
xial-reverse-propeller-unmanned.html. (Accessed 4 May 2020). Retrieved online
on.
[151] X. Wang, X. Yu, S. Li, J. Liu, Composite block backstepping trajectory tracking
control for disturbed unmanned helicopters, Aero. Sci. Technol. 85 (2019)
386–398.
[152] A. Safaee, S.Z. Moussavi, M.S. Mehrabani, M.B. Menhaj, E. Ghobadi, Construction
and control of monocopter using MEMS AHRS, in: 11th IEEE International
Conference on Control & Automation (ICCA), IEEE, Taichung, Taiwan, 2014,
pp. 219–224, 18-20 June.
[153] T.S. Lembono, J.E. Low, L.S.T. Win, S. Foong, U.X. Tan, Orientation filter and
angular rates estimation in monocopter using accelerometers and magnetometer
with the Extended Kalman Filter, in: 2017 IEEE International Conference on

54

S. Darvishpoor et al.

[154]
[155]
[156]
[157]
[158]
[159]
[160]
[161]
[162]
[163]

[164]
[165]
[166]
[167]
[168]
[169]
[170]
[171]
[172]
[173]
[174]

[175]
[176]
[177]
[178]
[179]

[180]

[181]
[182]

Progress in Aerospace Sciences 121 (2020) 100694
[183] E-flite, X-VERT VTOL BNF Basic, 2020, p. 1. Available from, https://www.hori
zonhobby.com/product/horizon-hobby-best-brands/park-flyers/e-flite-brand/
x-vert-vtol-bnf-basic-efl1850. (Accessed 5 May 2020). Retrieved online on.
[184] NavalDrones, “VD200”, (2020) 1, Available from http://www.navaldrones.
com/VD200.html, Retrieved online on 5 May 2020.
[185] S. Yu, J. Heo, S. Jeong, Y. Kwon, Technical analysis of VTOL UAV, J. Comput.
Commun. 4 (No. 15) (2016) 92–97.
[186] X. company, X-wing, Google, Available from, https://x.company/projects/wing/.
(Accessed 5 May 2020). Retrieved online on.
[187] A.F. Reyes, Design and Development of an UAV with Hybrid Flight Capabilities,
Master thesis, León, Guanajuato, México, 2018.
[188] O. Garcia, A. Sanchez, J. Escareno, R. Lozano, Tail-sitter UAV having one tilting
rotor: modeling, control and real-time experiments, IFAC Proceedings Volumes 41
(No. 2) (2008) 809–814.
[189] D.A. Ta, I. Fantoni, R. Lozano, Modeling and control of a convertible mini-UAV,
in: IFAC Proceedings Volumes, vol. 44, 2011, pp. 1492–1497. No. 1.
[190] R.H. Stone, “The T-wing tail-sitter unmanned air vehicle: from design concept to
research flight vehicle, in: Proceedings of the Institution of Mechanical Engineers,
Part G: Journal of Aerospace Engineering, vol. 218, 2004, pp. 417–433. No. 6.
[191] R.C.B. Sampaio, A.C. Hernandes, M. Becker, F.M. Catalano, F. Zanini, J.
L. Nobrega, C. Martins, Novel hybrid electric motor glider-quadrotor MAV for inflight/V-STOL launching, in: 2014 IEEE Aerospace Conference, IEEE, Big Sky, MT,
USA, 2014, pp. 1–12, 1-8 March.
[192] Atmos UAV, (2020) 1, Available from https://www.atmosuav.com/, Retrieved
online on 5 May 2020.
[193] S. Yanguo, W. Huanjin, Design of flight control system for a small unmanned tilt
rotor aircraft, Chin. J. Aeronaut. 22 (No. 3) (2009) 250–256.
[194] Electric VTOL News, Project Zero, 2013, p. 5. Available from, https://evtol.news/
2013/05/01/project-zero/. (Accessed 5 May 2020). Retrieved online on.
[195] S. Carlson, A hybrid tricopter/flying-wing VTOL UAV, in: 52nd Aerospace Sciences
Meeting, National Harbor, Maryland, USA, 2014, 0016, 13-17 January.
[196] Y.O. Aktas, U. Ozdemir, Y. Dereli, A.F. Tarhan, A. Cetin, A. Vuruskan, B. Yuksek,
H. Cengiz, S. Basdemir, M. Ucar, M. Genctav, A low cost prototyping approach for
design analysis and flight testing of the TURAC VTOL UAV, in: 2014 International
Conference on Unmanned Aircraft Systems (ICUAS), IEEE, Orlando, FL, USA,
2014, pp. 1029–1039, 27-30 May.
[197] Birdseyeview, FireFLY6 PRO 1, 2020. Available from, https://www.birdseyeview.
aero/products/firefly6. (Accessed 5 May 2020). Retrieved online on.
[198] Quantum systems, VECTOR™, the 2in1 Vertical Take-Off Reconnaissance UAV,
2020, p. 1. Available from, https://www.quantum-systems.com/project/vector/.
(Accessed 5 May 2020). Retrieved online on.
[199] Foxtech, Foxtech Nimbus VTOL V2 aircraft for mapping and survey (preorder),
2020, p. 1. Available from, https://www.foxtechfpv.com/foxtech-nimbus-vtol-v2.
html. (Accessed 5 May 2020). Retrieved online on.
[200] AviationTimes, Boeing phantom Swift selected for DARPA X-plane competition,
2020, p. 1. Available from, https://aviation-times.aero/boeing-phantom-swift-se
lected-darpa-x-plane-competition/. (Accessed 5 May 2020). Retrieved online on.
[201] Quantum-systems, TRON F90+, 2017, p. 1. Available from, https://www.
quantum-systems.com/project/tron-f90/. (Accessed 5 May 2020). Retrieved
online on.
[202] J.J. Dickeson, D. Miles, O. Cifdaloz, V.L. Wells, A.A. Rodriguez, Robust LPV h
gain-scheduled hover-to-cruise conversion for a tilt-wing rotorcraft in the
presence of cg variations, in: 2007 American Control Conference, IEEE, New York,
NY, USA, 2007, pp. 5266–5271, 9-13 July.
[203] T. Ostermann, J. Holsten, Y. Dobrev, D. Moormann, Control concept of a tiltwing
UAV during low speed manoeuvring, in: Proceeding of the 28th International
Congress of the Aeronautical Sciences: ICAS Brisbane, Australia vol. 1190, 2012.
[204] E. Cetinsoy, S. Dikyar, C. Hançer, K.T. Oner, E. Sirimoglu, M. Unel, M.F. Aksit,
Design and construction of a novel quad tilt-wing UAV, Mechatronics 22 (No. 6)
(2012) 723–745.
[205] yumpu, AT10 Brochure - Acuity Technologies Home, 2015, p. 1. Available from,
https://www.yumpu.com/en/document/view/29036260/at10-brochure-acuit
y-technologies-home. (Accessed 5 May 2020). Retrieved online on.
[206] NASA, Ten-Engine Electric Plane Completes Successful Flight Test, 2020, p. 1.
Available from, https://www.nasa.gov/langley/ten-engine-electric-plane-compl
etes-successful-flight-test. (Accessed 5 May 2020). Retrieved online on.
[207] J.E. Low, L.T.S. Win, D.S.B. Shaiful, C.H. Tan, G.S. Soh, S. Foong, Design and
dynamic analysis of a transformable hovering rotorcraft (THOR), in: 2017 IEEE
International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA), IEEE, Singapore,
Singapore, 2017, pp. 6389–6396, 29 May-3 June.
[208] Iridium Dynamics, Halo 240-E Inspection, 2020, p. 1. Available from,
https://iridiumdynamics.com/product-category/uavs/#product-1. (Accessed 5
May 2020). Retrieved online on.
[209] H. Gu, X. Lyu, Z. Li, S. Shen, F. Zhang, Development and experimental verification
of a hybrid vertical take-off and landing (VTOL) unmanned aerial vehicle (UAV),
in: 2017 International Conference on Unmanned Aircraft Systems (ICUAS), IEEE,
Miami, FL, USA, USA, 2017, pp. 160–169, 13-16 June.
[210] Sikorsky archives, Sikorsky Product History, Cypher ® Unmanned Aerial Vehicle
(UAV), 2016, p. 1. Available from, https://www.sikorskyarchives.com/CYPHER.
php. (Accessed 5 May 2020). Retrieved online on.
[211] Embention, HADA-helicopter adaptive aircraft, 2020, p. 1. Available from,
https://www.embention.com/projects/hada-helicopter-adaptive-aircraft/.
(Accessed 5 May 2020). Retrieved online on.
[212] Arcturus-Uav, JUMP 20, 2020, p. 1. Available from, https://arcturus-uav.
com/product/jump-20. (Accessed 5 May 2020). Retrieved online on.

Robotics and Automation (ICRA), IEEE, Singapore, Singapore, 2017,
pp. 4537–4543, 29 May-3 June.
F. Broke, Marcy 1, Flat Broke, 2020, p. 1. Available from, http://coptershyna.
sourceforge.net/. (Accessed 4 May 2020). Retrieved online on.
G. Matič, M. Topič, M. Jankovec, Mathematical model of a monocopter based on
unsteady blade-element momentum theory, J. Aircraft 52 (No. 6) (2015)
1905–1913.
F. Shaohui, Monocopter, Temasek Lab, 2016, p. 1. Available from, https://temase
k-labs.sutd.edu.sg/projects/monoco/. (Accessed 4 May 2020). Retrieved online
on.
E.R. Ulrich, D.J. Pines, J.S. Humbert, From falling to flying: the path to powered
flight of a robotic samara nano air vehicle, Bioinspiration Biomimetics 5 (No. 4)
(2010), 045009.
L. Lubben, Monocopter, 2020, p. 1. Available from, https://insta-arduino.tumblr.
com/post/129945521246/arduino-arduinopromini-hmc5883l-monocopter.
(Accessed 4 May 2020). Retrieved online on.
S. Kang, J. Wang, J. Shan, Dynamics analysis and simulation for the invisible
monowing rotorcraft, in: The 27th Chinese Control and Decision Conference,
IEEE, Qingdao, China, 2015, pp. 4029–4034, 23-25 May.
S. Kang, J. Wang, J. Shan, Stability analysis of a visibility-reduced monocopter,
in: Proceedings of the Institution of Mechanical Engineers, Part G: Journal of
Aerospace Engineering, vol. 230, 2016, pp. 653–667. No. 4.
E. Shrestha, V. Hrishikeshavan, M. Benedict, D. Yeo, I. Chopra, Development of
control strategies for a twin-cyclocopter in forward flight, J. Am. Helicopter Soc.
61 (No. 4) (2016) 1–9.
H. Yu, L.K. Bin, H.W. Rong, The research on the performance of cyclogyro, in: 6th
AIAA Aviation Technology, Integration, and Operations Conference, Wichita,
Kansas, 2006, pp. 25–27. September.
M. Trancossi, A. Dumas, C. Xisto, J. Pascoa, A. Andrisani, Roto-cycloid propelled
airship dimensioning and energetic equilibrium, in: SAE 2014 Aerospace Systems
and Technology Conference, September 2014, pp. 23–25. Cincinnati, United
Kingdom.
M.L. McNabb, Development of a Cycloidal Propulsion Computer Model and
Comparison with Experiment, Doctoral dissertation, Mississippi State University,
2001.
Z. Adams, M. Benedict, V. Hrishikeshavan, I. Chopra, Design, development, and
flight test of a small-scale cyclogyro UAV utilizing a novel cam-based passive
blade pitching mechanism, Int. J. Micro Air Veh. 5 (No. 2) (2013) 145–162.
M. Benedict, E. Shrestha, V. Hrishikeshavan, I. Chopra, Development of a micro
twin-rotor cyclocopter capable of autonomous hover, J. Aircraft 51 (No. 2) (2014)
672–676.
A. Halder, M. Benedict, Nonlinear aeroelastic coupled trim analysis of a twin
cyclocopter in forward flight, AIAA J. (2020) 1–15.
C.C. Runco, D. Coleman, M. Benedict, Design and development of a 30 g
cyclocopter, J. Am. Helicopter Soc. 64 (No. 1) (2019) 1–10.
Nikola, T., “Apparatus for aerial transportation” U.S. Patent 1,655,114, 1928.
M. Aksugur, G. Inalhan, Design methodology of a hybrid propulsion driven
electric powered miniature tailsitter unmanned aerial vehicle, in: 2nd
International Symposium on UAVs, 2009, pp. 505–529. Reno, Nevada, USA.
R.B. Bramlette, R.M. Barrett-Gonzalez, Design and flight testing of a convertible
quadcopter for maximum flight speed, in: 55th AIAA Aerospace Sciences Meeting,
Grapevine, Texas, USA, 2017, 0243, 9–13 January.
D. Kubo, S. Suzuki, Tail-sitter vertical takeoff and landing unmanned aerial
vehicle: transitional flight analysis, J. Aircraft 45 (No. 1) (2008) 292–297.
X. Wang, Z. Chen, Z. Yuan, Modeling and control of an agile tail-sitter aircraft”,
J. Franklin Inst. 352 (No. 12) (2015) 5437–5472.
Y. Ke, H. Yu, C. Chi, M. Yue, B.M. Chen, A systematic design approach for an
unconventional UAV J-Lion with extensible morphing wings, in: 2016 12th IEEE
International Conference on Control and Automation (ICCA), IEEE, Kathmandu,
Nepal, 2016, pp. 44–49, 1-3 June.
Aerovel, VTOL combined with wing-borne cruise, Aerovel (2020) 1. Available
from, https://aerovel.com. (Accessed 4 May 2020). Retrieved online on.
H. Zhao, Development of a Dynamic Model of a Ducted Fan VTOL UAV, Master
thesis, Aerospace, Mechanical and Manufacturing Engineering, RMIT University,
2009.
Y. Jung, S. Cho, D.H. Shim, A comprehensive flight control design and experiment
of a tail-sitter UAV, in: AIAA Guidance, Navigation, and Control (GNC)
Conference, 2013, pp. 19–22. Boston, MA, USA, p. 4992.
Martinuav, V-BAT, Available from, http://martinuav.com/portfolio/v-bat/.
(Accessed 4 May 2020). Retrieved online on.
J.M. Barth, J.P. Condomines, M. Bronz, L.R. Lustosa, J.M. Moschetta, C. Join,
M. Fliess, Fixed-wing UAV with transitioning flight capabilities: model-Based or
Model-Free Control approach? A preliminary study, in: 2018 International
Conference on Unmanned Aircraft Systems (ICUAS), IEEE, Dallas, TX, USA, 2018,
pp. 1157–1164, 12-15 June.
M. Hochstenbach, C. Notteboom, B. Theys, J. De Schutter, Design and control of
an unmanned aerial vehicle for autonomous parcel delivery with transition from
vertical take-off to forward flight–vertikul, a quadcopter tailsitter, Int. J. Micro
Air Veh. 7 (No. 4) (2015) 395–405.
S. Garcia-Nieto, J. Velasco-Carrau, F. Paredes-Valles, J.V. Salcedo, R. Simarro,
Motion equations and attitude control in the vertical flight of a VTOL bi-rotor
UAV, Electronics 8 (No. 2) (2019) 208.
Transition robotics, (2020) 1, Available from https://transition-robotics.com,
Retrieved online on 5 May 2020.

55

S. Darvishpoor et al.

Progress in Aerospace Sciences 121 (2020) 100694

[213] D.I.Y. Drones, Slt VTOL UAV, 2020, p. 1. Available from, https://diydrones.com/
profiles/blogs/out-of-the-black-slt-vtol-uav. (Accessed 5 May 2020). Retrieved
online on.
[214] U.A.S. Vision, Rheinmetall Airborne Systems Tactical Hybrid UAS, vol. 9, 2012.
Available from, https://www.uasvision.com/2012/09/03/rheinmetall-airborne
-systems-tactical-hybrid-uas/. (Accessed 5 May 2020). Retrieved online on.
[215] Tech Briefs, Stop-Rotor Rotary Wing Aircraft, Naval Research Laboratory,
Washington, DC, 2020, p. 1. Available from, https://www.techbriefs.com/comp
onent/content/article/tb/techbriefs/aerospace/27203. (Accessed 5 May 2020).
Retrieved online on.
[216] G. Throneberry, M. Hassanalian, A. Abdelkefi, Insights into sensitivity of wing
shape and kinematic parameters relative to aerodynamic performance of flapping
wing nano air vehicles, Drones 3 (No. 2) (2019) 49.
[217] M. Ghommem, M. Hassanalian, M. Al-Marzooqi, G. Throneberry, A. Abdelkefi,
Sizing process, aerodynamic analysis, and experimental assessment of a biplane
flapping wing nano air vehicle, in: Proceedings of the Institution of Mechanical
Engineers, Part G: Journal of Aerospace Engineering, 2019, 0954410019852570.
[218] M. Hassanalian, G. Throneberry, A. Abdelkefi, Wing shape and dynamic twist
design of bio-inspired nano air vehicles for forward flight purposes, Aero. Sci.
Technol. 68 (2017) 518–529.
[219] M. Hassanalian, G. Throneberry, A. Abdelkefi, Investigation on the planform and
kinematic optimization of bio-inspired nano air vehicles for hovering
applications, Meccanica (2018).
[220] M. Hassanalian, A. Abdelkefi, M. Wei, S. Ziaei-Rad, A novel methodology for wing
sizing of bio-inspired flapping wing micro air vehicles: theory and prototype, Acta
Mech. 228 (No. 3) (2017) 1097–1113.
[221] C. Gerrard, M. Ward, Final Year Honours Project Micro Air Vehicle, The
University of Adelaide, Australia, 2007.
[222] K.P.P.M. Sai, K. Bharadwaj, K.R. Teja, K. Dagamoori, K.V.S. Tarun, V. Vijayan,
Design, fabrication and testing of flapping wing micro air vehicle, Int. Journal of
Engineering Research and Applications 6 (2016) 135–150.
[223] M. Keennon, K. Klingebiel, H. Won, Development of the nano hummingbird: a
tailless flapping wing micro air vehicle, in: 50th AIAA Aerospace Sciences
Meeting Including the New Horizons Forum and Aerospace Exposition, vol. 588,
2012, pp. 9–12. Nashville, Tennessee.
[224] R. Wood, R. Nagpal, G.Y. Wei, “Flight of the robobees” Scientific American 308
(No. 3) (2013) 60–65.
[225] S. Watkins, A. Fisher, A. Mohamed, M. Marino, M. Thompson, R. Clothier, S. Ravi,
The turbulent flight environment close to the ground and its effects on fixed and
flapping wings at low Reynolds number, in: 5th European Conference for
Aeronautics and Space Sciences, 2014, pp. 1–5. Munich, Germany.
[226] W. Shyy, H. Aono, C.K. Kang, H. Liu, An Introduction to Flapping Wing
Aerodynamics, vol. 37, Cambridge University Press, New York, 2013.
[227] M. Hassanalian, A. Abdelkefi, Towards improved hybrid actuation mechanisms
for flapping wing micro air vehicles: analytical and experimental investigations,
Drones 3 (No. 3) (2019) 73.
[228] A.N. Chand, M. Kawanishi, T. Narikiyo, Design analysis, modeling and
experimental validation of a bird-like flapping-wing flying robot, in: IMAV 2014:
International Micro Air Vehicle Conference and Competition 2014, 2014,
pp. 12–15. Delft, The Netherlands.
[229] Sean Kinkade Ornithopter, US Patent 9858922, May 17, 2001.
[230] A. Tandon, A. Vajpai, A.N. Mishra, Design of an autonomous ornithopter with live
video reception for military surveillance, Int. J. Renew. Energy Technol. 2 (No.
10) (2013) 489–493.
[231] B. Bruggerman, Improving Flight Performance of DelFly II in Hover by Improving
Wing Design and Driving Mechanism, Master thesis, Delft University of
Technology, 2010.
[232] G.C. De Croon, M.A. Groen, C. De Wagter, B. Remes, R. Ruijsink, B.W. van
Oudheusden, Design, Aerodynamics and Autonomy of the DelFly, vol. 7,
Bioinspiration & biomimetics, 2012, 025003. No. 2.
[233] M. Hassanalian, A. Abdelkefi, Methodologies for weight estimation of fixed and
flapping wing micro air vehicles, Meccanica 52 (No. 9) (2017) 2047–2068.
[234] FESTO, (2020) 1, Available from https://www.festo.com, Retrieved online on 6
May 2020.
[235] K. Jones, M. Platzer, Bio-inspired design of flapping-wing micro air vehicles-an
engineer’s perspective, in: 44th AIAA Aerospace Sciences Meeting and Exhibit,
2006. Reston, Virginia, January.
[236] M.F. Platzer, K.D. Jones, J. Young, J.C. Lai, Flapping wing aerodynamics: progress
and challenges, AIAA J. 46 (No. 9) (2008) 2136–2149.
[237] H.V. Phan, H.C. Park, Insect-inspired, tailless, hover-capable flapping-wing
robots: recent progress, challenges, and future directions, Prog. Aero. Sci. 111
(2019) 100573.
[238] W. Shyy, Y. Lian, J. Tang, D. Viieru, H. Liu, Aerodynamics of Low Reynolds
Number Flyers, vol. 22, Cambridge University Press, New York, 2007.
[239] W. Shyy, H. Aono, S.K. Chimakurthi, P. Trizila, C.K. Kang, C.E. Cesnik, H. Liu,
Recent progress in flapping wing aerodynamics and aeroelasticity, Prog. Aero.
Sci. 46 (No. 7) (2010) 284–327.
[240] C.T. Orlowski, A.R. Girard, Dynamics, stability, and control analyses of flapping
wing micro-air vehicles, Prog. Aero. Sci. 51 (2012) 18–30.
[241] S.A. Ansari, R. Żbikowski, K. Knowles, Aerodynamic modelling of insect-like
flapping flight for micro air vehicles, Prog. Aero. Sci. 42 (No. 2) (2006) 129–172.
[242] A. Bozkurt, R.F. Gilmour Jr., A. Lal, Balloon-assisted flight of radio-controlled
insect biobots, IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng. 56 (No. 9) (2009) 2304–2307.
[243] H. Sato, T.T.V. Doan, S. Kolev, N.A. Huynh, C. Zhang, T.L. Massey, J. Van Kleef,
K. Ikeda, P. Abbeel, M.M. Maharbiz, Deciphering the role of a coleopteran
steering muscle via free flight stimulation, Curr. Biol. 25 (No. 6) (2015) 798–803.

[244] H. Sato, Y. Peeri, E. Baghoomian, C.W. Berry, M.M. Maharbiz, Radio-controlled
cyborg beetles: a radio-frequency system for insect neural flight control, in: 2009
IEEE 22nd International Conference on Micro Electro Mechanical Systems, IEEE,
Sorrento, Italy, 2009, pp. 216–219, 25-29 Jan.
[245] H. Sato, C.W. Berry, Y. Peeri, E. Baghoomian, B.E. Casey, G. Lavella, J.
M. VandenBrooks, J. Harrison, M.M. Maharbiz, Remote radio control of insect
flight, Front. Integr. Neurosci. 3 (2009) 24.
[246] J. Bennington-Castro, NBC News, How Cyborg Insects Could Save Lives and Stop
Our Enemies, 2020, p. 1. Available from, https://www.nbcnews.com/mach/inno
vation/how-cyborg-insects-could-save-lives-stop-our-enemies-n730016.
(Accessed 6 May 2020). Retrieved online on.
[247] Biotele, THE CYBORG ZOO vol. 1, 2020. Available from, http://www.biotele.
com/cyborgzoo.html. (Accessed 6 May 2020). Retrieved online on.
[248] A.V. Koldaev, Non-military UAV applications, in: Aero India International
Seminar-2007 Edition, 2007. Bangalore, February.
[249] H. Shakhatreh, A.H. Sawalmeh, A. Al-Fuqaha, Z. Dou, E. Almaita, I. Khalil, N.
S. Othman, A. Khreishah, M. Guizani, Unmanned aerial vehicles (UAVs): a survey
on civil applications and key research challenges, IEEE Access 7 (2019)
48572–48634.
[250] F. Nex, F. Remondino, UAV for 3D mapping applications: a review, Applied
geomatics 6 (No. 1) (2014) 1–15.
[251] South, SKYCRUISER A22, 2020, p. 1. Available from, https://southinstrument.co
m/product/details/pro_tid/1/id/156.html. (Accessed 1 June 2020). Retrieved
online on.
[252] Geo-Matching, Unmanned Systems Group Supercam S100, 2017, p. 1. Available
from, https://geo-matching.com/uas-for-mapping-and-3d-modelling/supercams100. (Accessed 1 June 2020). Retrieved online on.
[253] SenseFly, eBee SQ the Advanced Agriculture Drone, 2016, p. 1. Available from,
https://www.sensefly.com/drone/ebee-sq-agriculture-drone/. (Accessed 1 June
2020). Retrieved online on.
[254] Geo-Matching, UAV Instruments Spain CIES 2.2 SOLAR POWERED, 2020, p. 1.
Available from, https://geo-matching.com/uas-for-mapping-and-3d-mode
lling/cies-2-2-solar-powered. (Accessed 1 June 2020). Retrieved online on.
[255] EasyMapUAV, MasterFly 1, 2016. Available from, http://www.easymapuav.
com/master.html. (Accessed 1 June 2020). Retrieved online on.
[256] Geo-Matching, Satlab SLA-1 fixed wing RTK UAS, 2020, p. 1. Available from, htt
ps://geo-matching.com/uas-for-mapping-and-3d-modelling/sla-1-fixed-wing-rtkuas. (Accessed 1 June 2020). Retrieved online on.
[257] Topcon, Sirius Pro, 2013, p. 1. Available from, https://www.topconpositioning.
com/mass-data-collection/aerial-mapping/sirius-pro. (Accessed 1 June 2020).
Retrieved online on.
[258] Aeromao Company, Aeromapper talon, 2020, p. 1. Available from, https://www.
aeromao.com/products/aeromapper-talon/. (Accessed 1 June 2020). Retrieved
online on.
[259] Skyshot Ltd, Skyshot HELIKITE aerostat 1, 2016. Available from, https://www.he
likites.com/skyshot. (Accessed 1 June 2020). Retrieved online on.
[260] M. Murison, Safer, Quieter and Less Ominous: Could Spacial’s Halo Rival Quads?,
2017, p. 5. Available from, https://dronelife.com/2017/05/08/spacial-ha
lo-drone/. (Accessed 1 June 2020). Retrieved online on.
[261] Geo-Matching, Satlab Satlab SLM-2 Multi-Rotor UAS, 2016, p. 1. Available from,
https://geo-matching.com/uas-for-mapping-and-3d-modelling/satlab-slm-2-mul
ti-rotor-uas. (Accessed 1 June 2020). Retrieved online on.
[262] Italdrone, BIGONE8HSE, 2020, p. 1. Available from, https://www.italdron.co
m/professionals-drones-and-accessories/professionals-drones/bigone-8hse-pro.
(Accessed 1 June 2020). Retrieved online on.
[263] QwcTec, Ascending Technologies AscTec Falcon 8, 2014, p. 1. Available from,
http://www.asctec.de/en/asctec-professional-uav/geo-expert-professional-aeria
l-drone-survey-sensing-geo-gis-3d/. (Accessed 1 June 2020). Retrieved online on.
[264] ECAgroup, UAV IT180-120/Unmanned Aerial Vehicle, 2020, p. 1. Available from,
https://www.ecagroup.com/en/solutions/uav-it180-120-unmanned-aerial-veh
icle. (Accessed 1 June 2020). Retrieved online on.
[265] Geo-Matching, Applied Airborne X-Mapper PPK (GNSS PPK), 2016, p. 1.
Available from, https://geo-matching.com/uas-for-mapping-and-3d-modelling/xmapper-ppk-gnss-ppk. (Accessed 1 June 2020). Retrieved online on.
[266] Cryogenic Society of America, Inc., Hydrogen Fuel Cell-Powered Drone Sets New
Flight Time Record, 2020, p. 1. Available from, https://cryogenicsociety.org/369
75/news/hydrogen_fuel_cell-powered_drone_sets_new_flight_time_record/.
(Accessed 12 July 2020). Retrieved online on.
[267] Flying-Cam, Meet Sarah, 2017, p. 1. Available from, https://wp.flying-cam.com/
index.php/home-2-2/meetsarah/. (Accessed 1 June 2020). Retrieved online on.
[268] Alpha Unmanned Systems, AUS SNIPER UAV, 2016, p. 11. Available from, htt
ps://alphaunmannedsystems.com/2016/11/28/aus-sniper-uav-the-best-giftnowadays/. (Accessed 1 June 2020). Retrieved online on.
[269] Wingtra, WINGTRAONE - Mapping Drone for High-Accuracy Aerial Surveys,
2019, p. 1. Available from, https://wingtra.com/mapping-drone-wingtraone/.
(Accessed 1 June 2020). Retrieved online on.
[270] AtmosUAV, Meet Marlyn 1, 2019. Available from, https://www.atmosuav.com.
(Accessed 1 June 2020). Retrieved online on.
[271] 4frontrobotics, Unmanned Aerial Vehicles (UAVs), 2014, p. 1. Available from,
https://www.4frontrobotics.com/uavs. (Accessed 1 June 2020). Retrieved online
on.
[272] Quantum-systems, TRON F90+, 2017, p. 1. Available from, https://www.
quantum-systems.com/project/tron-f90/. (Accessed 1 June 2020). Retrieved
online on.

56

S. Darvishpoor et al.

Progress in Aerospace Sciences 121 (2020) 100694

[273] Quantum-systems, Trinity F90+, 2017, p. 1. Available from, https://www.quant
um-systems.com/project/trinity-f90/. (Accessed 1 June 2020). Retrieved online
on.
[274] Germandrones, The Songbird, 2020, p. 1. Available from, https://www.german
drones.com/en/songbird. (Accessed 1 June 2020). Retrieved online on.
[275] Geo-Matching, V-TOL aerospace V-TOL aerospace Goshawk hybrid, 2017, p. 1.
Available from, https://geo-matching.com/uas-for-mapping-and-3d-modelling/vtol-aerospace-goshawk-hybrid. (Accessed 1 June 2020). Retrieved online on.
[276] South, Skycruiser MF2500, 2020, p. 1. Available from, https://southinstrument.
com/product/details/pro_tid/1/id/9.html. (Accessed 1 June 2020). Retrieved
online on.
[277] DeltaQuad, DeltaQuad Pro VTOL UAV 1, 2020. Available from, www.deltaquad.
com/. (Accessed 1 June 2020). Retrieved online on.
[278] HAMR, Ease of Use of a Multi-Rotor with the Flight Time of a Fixed Wing, 2017,
p. 1. Available from, https://geo-matching.com/uas-for-mapping-and-3d-modell
ing/hamr. (Accessed 1 June 2020). Retrieved online on.
[279] D. Giordan, Y. Hayakawa, F. Nex, F. Remondino, P. Tarolli, The use of remotely
piloted aircraft systems (RPASs) for natural hazards monitoring and management,
Nat. Hazards Earth Syst. Sci. 18 (No. 4) (2018), 079–1096.
[280] M. Oliveira-da-Costa, M. Marmontel, D.S. da-Rosa, A. Coelho, S. Wich,
F. Mosquera-Guerra, F. Trujillo, Effectiveness of unmanned aerial vehicles to
detect Amazon dolphins, Oryx (2019) 1–3.
[281] A.P. Colefax, P.A. Butcher, D.E. Pagendam, B.P. Kelaher, Reliability of marine
faunal detections in drone-based monitoring”, Ocean Coast Manag. 174 (2019)
108–115.
[282] B. Taggart, The Use of Unmanned Aerial Systems in Marine Mammal Research,
2020, p. 1. Available from, https://oceansunmanned.org/the-use-of-unmannedaerial-systems-in-marine-mammal-research/. (Accessed 1 June 2020). Retrieved
online on.
[283] T.R.H. Goodbody, N. Coops, From Firefighting to Field Analysis, Drones Are
Helping Us Curb Climate Change, Weforum, 2019, p. 11. Available from, https
://www.weforum.org/agenda/2019/11/drones-help-environmental-wildfires
-mapping/. (Accessed 1 June 2020). Retrieved online on.
[284] K. Prokopovič, Commercial Drones – A New Page in the World of Labour, vol. 8,
Aviationvoice, 2016. Available from, https://aviationvoice.com/commercial-dr
ones-a-new-page-in-the-world-of-labour-201608101134/. (Accessed 1 June
2020). Retrieved online on.
[285] K. Hartman, P. van der Harst, R. Vilela, “Continuous focal group follows operated
by a drone enable analysis of the relation between sociality and position in a
group of male Risso’s dolphins (grampus griseus)”, Frontiers in Marine Science 7
(No. 283) (2020).
[286] V. Pirotta, A. Smith, M. Ostrowski, D. Russell, I.D. Jonsen, A. Grech, R. Harcourt,
An economical custom-built drone for assessing whale health, Frontiers in Marine
Science 4 (No. 425) (2017) 1–12.
[287] J. Linchant, C. Vermeulen, J. Lisein, P. Lejeune, P. Bouche, Using drones to count
the elephants: a new approach of wildlife inventories, in: Scientific Congresses
and Symposiums : Unpublished conference/Abstract, 2013. Brussels, Belgium, 29
August, http://hdl.handle.net/2268/155428.
[288] M.C. Harvey, J.V. Rowland, K.M. Luketina, Drone with thermal infrared camera
provides high resolution georeferenced imagery of the Waikite geothermal area,
New Zealand, J. Volcanol. Geoth. Res. 325 (2016) 61–69.
[289] J.C. van Gemert, C.R. Verschoor, P. Mettes, K. Epema, L.P. Koh, S. Wich, Nature
conservation drones for automatic localization and counting of animals, in:
European Conference on Computer Vision, Springer, Cham, 2014, pp. 255–270.
September.
[290] A.C. Van Andel, S.A. Wich, C. Boesch, L.P. Koh, M.M. Robbins, J. Kelly, H.
S. Kuehl, Locating chimpanzee nests and identifying fruiting trees with an
unmanned aerial vehicle, Am. J. Primatol. 77 (No. 10) (2015) 1122–1134.
[291] B.J.S. Cook, 4 Taxidermy Drones: Yes, That’s a Thing, Makezine, 2015, p. 3.
Available from, https://makezine.com/2015/03/31/4-taxidermy-drones-yes-tha
ts-thing/. (Accessed 16 June 2020). Retrieved online on.
[292] R.C. Anderson, A.L. DuBois, D.K. Piech, W.A. Searcy, S. Nowicki, Male response to
an aggressive visual signal, the wing wave display, in swamp sparrows, Behav.
Ecol. Sociobiol. 67 (No. 4) (2013) 593–600.
[293] E. Chang, L.Y. Matloff, A.K. Stowers, D. Lentink, Soft biohybrid morphing wings
with feathers underactuated by wrist and finger motion, Science Robotics 5 (No.
38) (2020) 1–14.
[294] S. Ahirwar, R. Swarnkar, S. Bhukya, G. Namwade, Application of drone in
agriculture, International Journal of Current Microbiology and Applied Sciences 8
(No. 01) (2019) 2500–2505.
[295] U.R. Mogili, B.B.V.L. Deepak, Review on application of drone systems in precision
agriculture, Procedia computer science 133 (2018) 502–509.
[296] F. Marinello, A. Pezzuolo, A. Chiumenti, L. Sartori, Technical analysis of
unmanned aerial vehicles (drones) for agricultural applications, Engineering for
Rural Development 5 (2016) 870–875.
[297] Direct Industry, Fixed-wing UAV/Aerial Photography/for Agricultural
Applications/Carbon Fiber, 2020, p. 1. Available from, https://www.directindust
ry.com/prod/ageagle/product-182402-1802685.html. (Accessed 16 June 2020).
Retrieved online on.
[298] S. Wordsworth, Heavy-lift Agricultural Drone Prepares for Tests, Ivtinternational,
2019, p. 1. Available from, https://www.ivtinternational.com/news/heavy-lift-a
gricultural-drone-prepares-for-tests.html. (Accessed 16 June 2020). Retrieved
online on.
[299] R. Tuttle, Lay of the Land: Unmanned Systems Coming to Commercial
Agriculture, Robohub, 2013, p. 1. Available from, https://robohub.org/lay-of-th

[300]
[301]

[302]
[303]
[304]
[305]
[306]
[307]

[308]

[309]
[310]
[311]
[312]
[313]

[314]

[315]
[316]

[317]
[318]
[319]
[320]

[321]
[322]
[323]
[324]

[325]

57

e-land-unmanned-systems-coming-to-commercial-agriculture/. (Accessed 16
June 2020). Retrieved online on.
J. Lantos, The Environment Has a New Best Friend, Thedronesworld, 2018, p. 1.
Available from, https://thedronesworld.net/environment-s-new-best-frienddrones/. (Accessed 16 June 2020). Retrieved online on.
Phanuwatnandee, Agriculture Drone Flying over the Rice Field to Sprayed
Chemical or Fertilizer, Freepik, 2020, p. 1. Available from, https://www.freepik.
com/premium-photo/agriculture-drone-flying-rice-field-sprayed-chemical-fer
tilizer_7690529.htm. (Accessed 16 June 2020). Retrieved online on.
DJI, DJI Introduces Company’s First Agriculture Drone, 2015, p. 1. Available
from, https://www.dji.com/newsroom/news/dji-introduces-company-s-first
-agriculture-drone. (Accessed 16 June 2020). Retrieved online on.
S. Waharte, N. Trigoni, Supporting search and rescue operations with UAVs, in:
2010 International Conference on Emerging Security Technologies, IEEE,
Canterbury, UK, 2010, pp. 142–147, 6-7 September.
E.T. Alotaibi, S.S. Alqefari, A. Koubaa, Lsar: multi-UAV collaboration for search
and rescue missions, IEEE Access 7 (2019) 55817–55832.
D. Erdos, A. Erdos, S.E. Watkins, An experimental UAV system for search and
rescue challenge”, IEEE Aero. Electron. Syst. Mag. 28 (No. 5) (2013) 32–37.
M.A. Goodrich, B.S. Morse, D. Gerhardt, J.L. Cooper, M. Quigley, J.A. Adams,
C. Humphrey, “Supporting wilderness search and rescue using a camera-equipped
mini UAV, J. Field Robot. 25 (1-2) (2008) 89–110.
T. Tomic, K. Schmid, P. Lutz, A. Domel, M. Kassecker, E. Mair, I.L. Grixa, F. Ruess,
M. Suppa, D. Burschka, Toward a fully autonomous UAV: research platform for
indoor and outdoor urban search and rescue, IEEE Robot. Autom. Mag. 19 (No. 3)
(2012) 46–56.
J. Scherer, S. Yahyanejad, S. Hayat, E. Yanmaz, T. Andre, A. Khan,
V. Vukadinovic, C. Bettstetter, H. Hellwagner, B. Rinner, An autonomous multiUAV system for search and rescue, in: Proceedings of the First Workshop on Micro
Aerial Vehicle Networks, Systems, and Applications for Civilian Use, 2015,
pp. 33–38. Florence, Italy.
M. Silvagni, A. Tonoli, E. Zenerino, M. Chiaberge, “Multipurpose UAV for search
and rescue operations in mountain avalanche events” Geomatics, Natural Hazards
and Risk 8 (No. 1) (2017) 18–33.
F. Wang, S.K. Phang, J. Cui, B.M. Chen, T.H. Lee, Search and rescue: a UAV aiding
approach, in: Proc. 23rd Canadian Congress of Applied Mechanics, Vancouver,
BC, Canada, 2011, pp. 183–186, 5-9 June.
S.P. Yeong, L.M. King, S.S. Dol, A review on marine search and rescue operations
using unmanned aerial vehicles, International Journal of Marine and
Environmental Sciences 9 (No. 2) (2015) 396–399.
J. Fincher, Pars Life-Saving Flying Robot Is Now a Reality, New Atlas, 2013, p. 1.
Available from, https://newatlas.com/pars-life-saving-flying-robot/29831/.
(Accessed 9 June 2020). Retrieved online on.
C. Stonor, Drones Start to Make Headway in UK Maritime Search and Rescue
Operations, Unmannedairspace, 2019, p. 1. Available from, https://www.
unmannedairspace.info/latest-news-and-information/drones-start-to-make-head
way-in-uk-maritime-search-and-rescue-operations/. (Accessed 9 June 2020).
Retrieved online on.
S. Hayes, World First: A Drone Rescues Two Swimmers off the Coast of Australia,
Fircroft, 2018, p. 1. Available from, https://www.fircroft.com/blogs/world-firsta-drone-rescues-two-swimmers-off-the-coast-of-australia-89661242286.
(Accessed 9 June 2020). Retrieved online on.
J. Qi, D. Song, H. Shang, N. Wang, C. Hua, C. Wu, X. Qi, J. Han, Search and rescue
rotary-wing uav and its application to the lushan ms 7.0 earthquake, J. Field
Robot. 33 (3) (2016) 290–321.
S. Lewis, UAVOS Completes Emergency Aid Drone Delivery Tests, Commercial
Drone Professional, 2020, p. 1. Available from, https://www.commercialdrone
professional.com/uavos-completes-emergency-aid-drone-delivery-tests/.
(Accessed 22 June 2020). Retrieved online on.
Drone America, Ariel 1, 2020. Available from, http://www.droneamerica.co
m/ariel. (Accessed 22 June 2020). Retrieved online on.
E.B. Vyshnavi, A. Ambati, G. Chamundeswari, G. Vineetha, Automatic CO2
extinguisher fire fighting drone, Int. J. Electron. Commun. Eng. 4 (No. 12) (2017)
17.
Walkera, Zhun, double firefighting 1, 2020. Available from, https://www.walk
era.com/index.php/Goods/info/id/71.html. (Accessed 11 June 2020). Retrieved
online on.
U.A.V. Global Drone, Chongqing’s National General Firefighting UAV Passed the
Test at Altitude of 5,150 Meters, 2018, p. 1. Available from, https://global
droneuav.com/news/Chongqings-National-General-Firefighting-UAV-Passed-theTest-at-Altitude-of-5150-Meters-3052.html. (Accessed 12 June 2020). Retrieved
online on.
A. Aerones, Erones DRONE Solutions”, 2020, p. 1. Available from, https://www.
aerones.com/other/drone/. (Accessed 11 June 2020). Retrieved online on.
FliteTest, Fire Fighting Drone, 2015, p. 1. Available from, https://www.flitetest.
com/articles/fire-fighting-drone. (Accessed 12 June 2020). Retrieved online on.
DroneLife.com, Zipline Begins Drone Delivery of Covid-19 Tests in Ghana, 2020.
Available from, https://www.uav.org/zipline-begins-drone-delivery-of-covid-19tests-in-ghana-is/. (Accessed 17 June 2020). Retrieved online on.
Solent-transport, Drones Will Be Used to Transport Medical Supplies across the
Solent to Support the Response to COVID-19, 2020. Available from, https://www.
solent-transport.com/news/item/drones-will-be-used-to-transport-medical-suppl
ies-across-the-solent-to-support-the-response-to-covid-19. (Accessed 22 June
2020). Retrieved online on.
A. Zila, Alibaba’s Delivery Drones over China, vol. 1, Youtube.Com, 2015.
Available from, https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=5ce2VvZI63g&list=PLL3t

S. Darvishpoor et al.

[326]

[327]

[328]

[329]

[330]
[331]

[332]

[333]
[334]
[335]
[336]
[337]
[338]

[339]
[340]

[341]
[342]
[343]

[344]

[345]

[346]

[347]

[348]

Progress in Aerospace Sciences 121 (2020) 100694

5xY2V44xOxvTIxS4AHuUhFE_bMwhz&index=14. (Accessed 17 June 2020).
Retrieved online on.
XAircraft, SF-express Logistics UAV by XAIRCRAFT, Youtube.Com, 2015, p. 1.
Available from, https://www.youtube.com/watch?v&equals;NOJd7x2fqBE&amp
;index&equals;17&amp;list&equals;PLL3t5xY2V44xOxvTIxS4AHuUhFE_bMwhz.
(Accessed 17 June 2020). Retrieved online on.
Abraham Tech, DHL Express Collaborates with EHang on Last-Mile Drone
Delivery, 2020, p. 1. Available from, https://www.abraham.tech/dhl-express-coll
aborates-with-ehang-on-last-mile-drone-delivery/. (Accessed 17 June 2020).
Retrieved online on.
Fps, FPS Takes Flight with First Commercial UK Drone Delivery, Fpsdistribution,
2015, p. 1. Available from, https://fpsdistribution.com/articles/fps-take-flightwith-1st-commercial-uk-drone-delivery/. (Accessed 17 June 2020). Retrieved
online on.
M. Sahi, Drone Delivery Pilot Projects Show Strong Potential, 2016, p. 1. Omdia,
Available from, https://tractica.omdia.com/automation-robotics/drone-deliver
y-pilot-projects-show-strong-potential/. (Accessed 17 June 2020). Retrieved
online on.
Drone delivery Canada, Condor, 2020, p. 1. Available from, https://dronedelive
rycanada.com/technology/. (Accessed 22 June 2020). Retrieved online on.
Yamaha-motor, Industrial Drone with Maximum Payload 35kg, Maximum
Altitude 2,800m, Cruising Range of 90km Yamaha Motor: FAZER R G2
Automated Navigation Unmanned Helicopter Showcased at the October Japan
International Aerospace Exhibition 2016, 2016, p. 1. Available from, htt
ps://global.yamaha-motor.com/news/2016/1011/fazer_r_g2.html. (Accessed 22
June 2020). Retrieved online on.
B. Coxworth, Yamaha and Japan Airlines Trial Same-Day Seafood Delivery by
Drone, New Atlas, 2020, p. 1. Available from, https://newatlas.com/drones/ya
maha-japan-airlines-seafood-drone-delivery/. (Accessed 22 June 2020).
Retrieved online on.
Google, Transforming the Way Goods Are Transported, 2020, p. 1. Available
from, https://x.company/projects/wing/. (Accessed 17 June 2020). Retrieved
online on.
Wingcopter, Wingcopter vol. 1, 2020. Available from, https://wingcopter.com.
(Accessed 18 June 2020). Retrieved online on.
S. Flynn, Ireland’s First BVLOS Delivery of Insulin, Skytango, 2019, p. 1.
Available from, https://skytango.com/irelands-first-bvlos-insulin-delivery-for-dia
betes-via-drone-to-inis-mor/. Retrieved online on 22 June 2020.
Drone delivery Canada, “Robin XL”, (2020) 1, Available from https://dronedelive
rycanada.com/technology/, Retrieved online on 22 June 2020.
K. Dorling, J. Heinrichs, G.G. Messier, S. Magierowski, Vehicle routing problems
for drone delivery, IEEE Transactions on Systems, Man, and Cybernetics: Systems
47 (No. 1) (2016) 70–85.
K. Min-Seok, The South Korean Military Is Catching up with a New Drone Army,
The-Security-Times, 2018, p. 1. Available from, https://www.the-security-times.
com/the-south-korean-military-is-catching-up-with-a-new-drone-army/.
(Accessed 16 June 2020). Retrieved online on.
Safran-Group, Drones, 2020, p. 1. Available from, https://www.safran-group.
com/defense/drones. (Accessed 15 June 2020). Retrieved online on.
S. Singh, How Military Drones Are Becoming Deadly Weapons across the Globe,
Indiatimes, 2019, p. 1. Available from, https://economictimes.indiatimes.com
/news/defence/how-military-drones-are-becoming-deadly-weapons-across-the
-globe/articleshow/71236124.cms?from=mdr. (Accessed 15 June 2020).
Retrieved online on.
Aerocontact, Harfang MALE UAS, 2020, p. 1. Available from, https://www.aero
contact.com/en/virtual-aviation-exhibition/product/611-harfang-male-uas.
(Accessed 15 June 2020). Retrieved online on.
R. Haridy, Machine Gun-Toting Drone Threatens to Change Combat Forever, New
Atlas, 2017, p. 1. Available from, https://newatlas.com/tikad-gun-toting-drone
-military/50946/. (Accessed 15 June 2020). Retrieved online on.
A. Hollings, Watch: turkey’s Newest Drones Are Quad-Copters Armed with
Machine Guns, Sofrep, 2019, p. 1. Available from, https://sofrep.com/news/wat
ch-turkeys-newest-drones-are-quad-copters-armed-with-machine-guns/.
(Accessed 15 June 2020). Retrieved online on.
A. Hollings, Belarus New Combat Drone Is a Grenade Launcher with Quad Rotors
Strapped to it, Sofrep.Com, 2018, p. 1. Available from, https://sofrep.com/news/
belarus-new-combat-drone-is-a-grenade-launcher-with-quad-rotors-strapped-toit/. (Accessed 27 October 2020). Retrieved online on.
S. Ralston, DRNE: Drone Aviation Is Well-Positioned in the Tethered Aerostat
Industry, vol. 1, Zacks, 2014. Available from, https://scr.zacks.com/News/PressReleases/Press-Release-Details/2014/DRNE-Drone-Aviation-is-Well-Positionedin-the-Tethered-Aerostat-Industry/default.aspx. (Accessed 15 June 2020).
Retrieved online on.
G.A. Bazzolo, ALTI Transition Hybrid Drone – Ideal for Countries with Reduced
Military Budget, Defence-Blog, 2017, p. 1. Available from, https://defence-blog.
com/news/alti-transition-hybrid-drone-ideal-for-countries-with-reduced-milita
ry-budget.html. (Accessed 15 June 2020). Retrieved online on.
S. Gallagher, DARPA Picks Northrop Grumman to Build “Tail-sitter” Navy Strike
Drone Prototype, Arstechnica, 2016, p. 1. Available from, https://arstechnica.co
m/information-technology/2016/01/darpa-picks-northrop-grumman-to-build-tai
l-sitter-navy-strike-drone-prototype/. (Accessed 16 June 2020). Retrieved online
on.
D. Grossman, DARPA’s Tailsitting Drone Could Someday Take off from Ever
Smaller Ships, Popularmechanics, 2017, p. 1. Available from, https://www.
popularmechanics.com/military/research/a25222/darpas-tern-tailsitting-dron
e/. (Accessed 16 June 2020). Retrieved online on.

[349] Militaryuav, Military UAV Bat-2, 2020, p. 1. Available from, https://militaryuav.
com/product/military-uav-bat-2/. (Accessed 16 June 2020). Retrieved online on.
[350] Northropgrumman, FIRE SCOUT, 2020, p. 1. Available from, https://www.northr
opgrumman.com/air/fire-scout/. (Accessed 16 June 2020). Retrieved online on.
[351] Flir, Black Hornet PRS, 2020, p. 1. Available from, https://www.flir.com/product
s/black-hornet-prs/. (Accessed 16 June 2020). Retrieved online on.
[352] Schiebel, CAMCOPTER® S-100, 2020, p. 1. Available from, https://schiebel.net/
products/camcopter-s-100/. (Accessed 1 July 2020). Retrieved online on.
[353] J. Excell, Insect Inspiration: UK Defence Drone Mimics Dragonfly Flight,
Theengineer, 2016, p. 1. Available from, https://www.theengineer.co.uk/insect-i
nspiration-uk-defence-drone-mimics-dragonfly-flight/. (Accessed 17 June 2020).
Retrieved online on.
[354] X. Yang, T. Wang, J. Liang, G. Yao, M. Liu, “Survey on the novel hybrid
aquatic–aerial amphibious aircraft: aquatic unmanned aerial vehicle (AquaUAV),
Prog. Aero. Sci. 74 (2015) 131–151.
[355] Z. Guo, T. Li, M. Wang, A survey on amphibious robots, in: 2018 37th Chinese
Control Conference (CCC), IEEE, Wuhan, China, 25-27 July 2018, pp. 5299–5304.
[356] UVSSYS, U650, 2020, p. 1. Available from, http://www.uvssys.com/en/product.
php?cid=23#tk. (Accessed 23 June 2020). Retrieved online on.
[357] Warrior, GULL UAV: Introduction, 2020, p. 1. Available from, http://www.warrio
raero.com/GULL/index.htm. (Accessed 23 June 2020). Retrieved online on.
[358] DRS Technologies, DRS RQ-15 Neptune vol. 1, 2020. Available from,
https://www.unols.org/sites/default/files/Neptune UAV.pdf. (Accessed 23 June
2020). Retrieved online on.
[359] R.D. Eubank, J.M. Bradley, E.M. Atkins, Energy-aware multiflight planning for an
unattended seaplane: flying fish, J. Aero. Inf. Syst. 14 (No. 2) (2017) 73–91.
[360] W. Weisler, W. Stewart, M.B. Anderson, K.J. Peters, A. Gopalarathnam, M. Bryant,
Testing and characterization of a fixed wing cross-domain unmanned vehicle
operating in aerial and underwater environments, IEEE J. Ocean. Eng. 43 (4)
(2017) 969–982.
[361] R. Siddall, A. Ortega Ancel, M. Kovač, Wind and water tunnel testing of a
morphing aquatic micro air vehicle, Interface focus 7 (No. 1) (2017), 20160085.
[362] P.L. Drews, A.A. Neto, M.F. Campos, A survey on aerial submersible vehicles, in:
Conference: IEEE/OES Oceans, Bremen, Germany, 2009, 4244-2523, May 11-15.
[363] B. Esakki, S. Ganesan, S. Mathiyazhagan, K. Ramasubramanian, B. Gnanasekaran,
B. Son, S.W. Park, J.S. Choi, Design of amphibious vehicle for unmanned mission
in water quality monitoring using internet of things, Sensors 18 (No. 10) (2018)
3318.
[364] QuadH2O, The HEXH2OTM kit, 2020, p. 1. Available from, https://www.quadh
2o.com/hexh2o/hexh2o-kit/. (Accessed 23 June 2020). Retrieved online on.
[365] QuadH2O, The QUADH2OTM kit, 2020, p. 1. Available from, https://www.quadh
2o.com/quadh2o/quadh2o-kit/. (Accessed 23 June 2020). Retrieved online on.
[366] K. Kawasaki, M. Zhao, K. Okada, M. Inaba, MUWA: multi-field universal wheel for
air-land vehicle with quad variable-pitch propellers, in: 2013 IEEE/RSJ
International Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems, Tokyo, Japan, 2013,
pp. 1880–1885, 3-7 November.
[367] Embedded Systems Research Laboratory, Loon Copter vol. 1, 2015. Available
from, https://sites.google.com/a/oakland.edu/oar/loon-copter. (Accessed 23
June 2020). Retrieved online on.
[368] G. Brown, New UAV Can Launch from Underwater for Aerial Missions, 2016, p. 3.
Available from, https://www.jhuapl.edu/PressRelease/160317. (Accessed 23
June 2020). Retrieved online on.
[369] S. Sheth, The Baywatch Inspired Drone!, Yankodesign, 2016, p. 10. Available
from, https://www.yankodesign.com/2016/10/25/the-baywatch-inspired-dr
one/. (Accessed 23 June 2020). Retrieved online on.
[370] A. Gao, A.H. Techet, Design considerations for a robotic flying fish, in:
OCEANS’11 MTS/IEEE KONA, IEEE, Waikoloa, HI, USA, 2011, pp. 1–8, 19-22
September.
[371] R. Cherney, Robotic Flying Fish, 2010, p. 1. Available from, http://www.
raphaelcherney.com/files/fish_report.pdf. (Accessed 23 June 2020). Retrieved
online on.
[372] G. Hautaluoma, A. Johnson, “NASA’s Dragonfly Will Fly Around Titan Looking
for Origins, Signs of Life” NASA, 2019, p. 1. Available from, https://www.nasa.
gov/press-release/nasas-dragonfly-will-fly-around-titan-looking-for-origins-signsof-life. (Accessed 15 June 2020). Retrieved online on.
[373] D. Brown, J. Wendel, “Mars Helicopter to Fly on NASA’s Next Red Planet Rover
Mission” NASA, 2018, p. 1. Available from, https://www.nasa.gov/press-release/
mars-helicopter-to-fly-on-nasa-s-next-red-planet-rover-mission. (Accessed 15
June 2020). Retrieved online on.
[374] NASA’s Open Data Portal, Mars Electric Reusable Flyer, 2018, p. 1. Available
from, https://data.nasa.gov/dataset/Mars-Electric-Reusable-Flyer/frp7-ga5v.
(Accessed 15 June 2020). Retrieved online on.
[375] G.A. Landis, A. Colozza, C.M. LaMarre, Atmospheric flight on Venus: a conceptual
design, J. Spacecraft Rockets 40 (No. 5) (2003) 672–677.
[376] G.A. Landis, Robotic exploration of the surface and atmosphere of Venus, Acta
Astronaut. 59 (No. 7) (2006) 570–579.
[377] Z. Xiongfeng, G. Zheng, H. Zhongxi, Sun-seeking eternal flight solar-powered
airplane for Venus exploration, J. Aero. Eng. 28 (No. 5) (2015), 04014127.
[378] W. Furlong, Venus Atmospheric Maneuverable Platform (VAMP),
Northropgrumman, 2020, p. 1. Available from, https://www.northropgrumman.
com/space/vamp/. (Accessed 15 June 2020). Retrieved online on.
[379] J. Bluck, NASA Engineer Works to Develop New Airplane to Seek Water on Mars,
NASA, 2007, p. 1. Available from, https://www.nasa.gov/centers/ames/resear
ch/2007/mars_airplane.html. (Accessed 15 June 2020). Retrieved online on.

58

S. Darvishpoor et al.

Progress in Aerospace Sciences 121 (2020) 100694
[394] P. Egan, “MLABs Bat Wing UAV Ornithopter Unveiled for Mission to Mars, SUAS
News, 2013, p. 7. Available from, https://www.suasnews.com/2013/07/mlabsbat-wing-uav-ornithopter-unveiled-for-mission-to-mars/. (Accessed 17 June
2020). Retrieved online on.
[395] Google, Expanding Internet Connectivity with Stratospheric Balloons, 2020, p. 1.
Available from, https://x.company/projects/loon/. (Accessed 17 June 2020).
Retrieved online on.
[396] Google, Harnessing Wind Energy with Kites to Create Renewable Electricity,
2020, p. 1. Available from, https://x.company/projects/makani/. (Accessed 17
June 2020). Retrieved online on.
[397] B. Lufkin, The Anti-drone Drone, Scientificamerican, 2015, p. 1. Available from,
https://www.scientificamerican.com/article/the-anti-drone-drone/. (Accessed
24 June 2020). Retrieved online on.
[398] S. Gade, A.A. Paranjape, S.J. Chung, Herding a flock of birds approaching an
airport using an unmanned aerial vehicle, in: AIAA Guidance, Navigation, and
Control Conference, Kissimmee, Florida, 2015, pp. 5–9. January.
[399] K. Robinson, Drones Cleaning Windows, Robinson-Solutions, 2016, p. 1.
Available from, http://robinson-solutions.blogspot.com/2016/01/drones-cleanin
g-windows.html. (Accessed 24 June 2020). Retrieved online on.
[400] D. Volt, Hercules 10 Spray Drone - Solar Panels Cleaning, 2020, p. 1. Available
from, https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=VbkWzLwy-Lg. (Accessed 24 June
2020). Retrieved online on.
[401] G. Harmon, Use of Drones to Clean Power Lines, 2017, p. 1. Available from, http
s://carpentersequip.com/use-of-drones-to-clean-power-lines/. (Accessed 24 June
2020). Retrieved online on.
[402] B. Heater, Aerones Makes Really Big Drones for Cleaning Turbines and Saving
Lives, 2018, p. 1. Available from, https://www.durableproject.eu/news/aeronesmakes-really-big-drones-for-cleaning-turbines-and-saving-lives/. (Accessed 24
June 2020). Retrieved online on.
[403] K.D. Atherton, Watch A Drone Take off from Another Drone, 2014, p. 1. Available
from, https://www.popsci.com/article/technology/watch-drone-take-anotherdrone/. (Accessed 24 June 2020). Retrieved online on.
[404] CCTV Video News Agency, Southwest China Puts on Dazzling Drone Show, 2019,
p. 1. Available from, https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=VvemT96Rozc.
(Accessed 24 June 2020). Retrieved online on.
[405] C.F. Peng, J.W. Hsieh, S.W. Leu, C.H. Chuang, Drone-based vacant parking space
detection, in: 2018 32nd International Conference on Advanced Information
Networking and Applications Workshops (WAINA), IEEE, Krakow, Poland, 2018,
pp. 618–622, 16-18 May.

[380] J. Levine, Could This Become the First Mars Airplane? NASA, 2015, p. 1.
Available from, https://www.nasa.gov/centers/armstrong/features/mars_airplan
e.html. (Accessed 15 June 2020). Retrieved online on.
[381] fish 0,punct]">V. Pellerito, M. Olivas, M. Hassanalian, Design a fixed-wing
unmanned aerial vehicle with dynamic soaring capability for titan exploration, in:
AIAA SciTech 2020, Orlando, FL, 2020, pp. 6–10. January.
[382] G. Acosta, M. Hassanalian, Fixed-wing drones for Venus exploration: design and
challenges, in: 2020 ASEE Gulf-Southwest Annual Conference, Virtual, 2020, 29
April.
[383] P. Pergola, V. Cipolla, Mission architecture for Mars exploration based on small
satellites and planetary drones, International Journal of Intelligent Unmanned
Systems 4 (2016) 142–162.
[384] L.A. Young, G. Briggs, E. Aiken, G. Pisanich, Rotary-wing decelerators for probe
descent through the atmosphere of Venus, Planet. Probe Work. NASA Ames
Research Center (2004) 209–215.
[385] N.S. Collins, System design and nonlinear state-dependent riccati equation control
of an autonomous Y-4 tilt-rotor aerobot for martian exploration, Ph.D.
Dissertation, University of Surrey, Guildford, Surrey, UK, 2016. July.
[386] J. Aguirre, V. Casado, N. Chamie, G.C. Zha, Mars intelligent reconaissance aerial
and ground explorer (MIRAGE), in: 45th AIAA Aerospace Sciences Meeting and
Exhibit, Reno, Nevada, 2007, pp. 8–11. January.
[387] NASA Langley Research Center, NASA Langley Engineers Propose Mars Flyer
Concept”, 2017, p. 1. Available from, https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=9
xjHCHR5_50&feature=emb_title. (Accessed 15 June 2020). Retrieved online on.
[388] NASA, Balloon Development Challenges for Mars, 2020, p. 1. Available from, htt
ps://www2.jpl.nasa.gov/adv_tech/balloons/mars_overview.htm. (Accessed 15
June 2020). Retrieved online on.
[389] Global Aerospace Corporation, Space Balloons, 2016, p. 1. Available from, http://
www.gaerospace.com/tag/space-balloons/. (Accessed 15 June 2020). Retrieved
online on.
[390] Zero2Infinity, Bloon, the day trip of a lifetime, 2020, p. 1. Available from,
http://www.zero2infinity.space/bloon/. (Accessed 15 June 2020). Retrieved
online on.
[391] Technovelgy, StratoSail & altair: Mars robot balloons, 2004, p. 1. Available from,
http://www.technovelgy.com/ct/Science-Fiction-News.asp?NewsNum&equals;
41. (Accessed 15 June 2020). Retrieved online on.
[392] J. Jones, J. Wu, Solar montgolfiere balloons for Mars, in: International Balloon
Technology Conference, AIAA, Norfolk, VA, USA, 1999, 28 June - 01 July.
[393] T.E. Zegers, J.A. Mulder, B. Remes, W. Berkouwer, B. Peeters, D. Lentink,
C. Passchier, September. ExoFly: a flapping wing aerobot for planetary survey and
exploration, in: European Planetary Science Congress Abstracts, vol. 3, 2008.

59

